Methods To Handle Different Type Of Questions
What 
Examples
What is available at Assi Ghat?
What is the gland that regulates sugar ?
What is the best time to visit Assi Ghat?


Who 
Examples 
Who was defeated by Akbar?
Who did build the Ramnagar Fort?  ==> Who did build the Ramnagar Fort at Varanasi?
Who did go to Akbar for seeking grant ?
To whom does this car belong

Methods-
We can replace who by either a person or an organization tag or even an object tag
And do guess which semantic role it wants for example Agent or Patient by doing something like find if
the rest part has an agent then we will look for patient else we will look for agent

When 
Examples
When is the Kumbh Mela organized in Varanasi?
When was Kashi Vishwanath Temple built?
When was the Swatantra Bhawan inaugrated ?


Methods
It can be seen that When comes at the place of time or date .
So we can say that we will find a preposition at,on,in preposition relation with the entity tag being date or time

Where
Where is Vishwanath Temple located?
Where we can find elephents in Varanasi?
Where is the Capsicum Food joint located?


Methods 
Where comes in place of location 
So go in sentence find at,in,on and search for entity tagged as location

Whose
Whose minar is this?
Whose tomb is this?
Whose worship is done at Vishwanath Temple?





Questions with How
How long is the Qutub Minar?
How far is Assi ghat from Dashwamedh Ghat?
How tall is the peak of Vishwanath Temple?
How old is the BHU building?
How heavy is the gold at Vishwanath temple?


For How we can have the following set of rules
Tall/Short - find a relation with prep is,    and find the entity with type meters or type object
Long - find a relation with prep is, or only a mod with the entity of type distance,find a prep around,almost, and if the entity is of type year then return 



Similiarly for 
wide - preposition is is, or mod and find entity of type area


heavy - preposition is is, or mod entity to be found of type gram,pound

Hot - preposition is is, or mod entity to be found is temp











