Agra (i/ˈɑːɡrə/; Āgrā) is a city on the banks of the river Yamuna in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh  India.  It is 378 kilometres (235 mi) west of the state capital  Lucknow  206 kilometres (128 mi) south of the national capital New Delhi and 125 kilometres (78 mi) north of Gwalior. Agra is one of the most populous cities in Uttar Pradesh  and the 24th most populous in India. Agra is a major tourist destination because of its many splendid Mughal-era buildings  most notably the Tāj Mahal  Agra Fort and Fatehpūr Sikrī  all three of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites.  Agra is included on the Golden Triangle tourist circuit  along with Delhi and Jaipur; and the Uttar Pradesh Heritage Arc  tourist circuit of UP state  along Lucknow the capital of the state and Varanasi. Agra falls within the Braj cultural region.The city was first mentioned in the epic Mahābhārata  where it was called Agrevaṇa (derived from Sanskrit (अग्रेवण) meaning  the border of the forest ).  Legend ascribes the founding of the city to Raja Badal Singh  a Sikarwar Rajput king (c. 1475)  whose fort  Badalgarh  stood on or near the site of the present fort. However  the 11th century Persian poet Mas'ūd Sa'd Salmān writes of a desperate assault on the fortress of Agra  then held by the Shāhī King Jayapala  by Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni.  It was mentioned for the first time in 1080 AD when a Ghaznavide force captured it. Sultan Sikandar Lodī (1488–1517) was the first to move his capital from Delhi to Agra in 1506. He governed the country from here and Agra assumed the importance of the second capital. He died in 1517 and his son  Ibrāhīm Lodī  remained in power there for nine more years and several palaces  wells and a mosque were built by him in the fort during his period. Finally being defeated at the Battle of Panipat in 1526.  Between 1540 and 1556  Afghans  beginning with Sher Shah Suri ruled the area. It achieved fame as the capital of the Mughal Empire from 1556 to 1658.Agra features a semiarid climate that borders on a humid subtropical climate. The city features mild winters  hot and dry summers and a monsoon season. However the monsoons  though substantial in Agra  are not quite as heavy as the monsoon in other parts of India. This is a primary factor in Agra featuring a semiarid climate as opposed to a humid subtropical climate.As of 2011[update] India census    Agra city has a population of 1 585 704  while the population of Agra cantonment is 53 053. The urban agglomeration of Agra has a population of 1 760 285.  Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Agra city has an average literacy rate of 73.11%  lower than the national average of 74%.  Literacy rate of males is considerably higher than that of women. The sex ratio in the city was 875 females per thousand males while child sex ratio stood at 857.  Agra district literacy rate is 62.56%.  Agra is dominated by Yadavs and Jats.[citation needed]According to the 2011 census   Agra district has a population of 4 380 793   roughly equal to the nation of Moldova  or the US state of Kentucky.  This gives it a ranking of 41st in India (out of a total of 640).  The district has a population density of 1 084 inhabitants per square kilometre (2 810/sq mi) .  52.5% of Agra's population is in the 15–59 years age category. Around 11% of the population is under 6 years of age.Hindus are 88.77% and Muslims 9.30% of the population in Agra district. Hinduism  Islam and Jainism are the major religions in Agra city with 80.68%  15.37% viz. 1.04% of the population adhering to them; others are 1.5%.The Catholic minority is served by its own Metropolitan Archdiocese of Agra.Although Agra's history is mainly associated with Mughal Empire  the place was established much before it and has linkages since Mahabharat period so Mahirshi Angira in 1000 BC.[citation needed] It is generally accepted that Sultan Sikandar Lodī  the Muslim ruler of the Delhi Sultanate  founded Agra in the year 1504. After the Sultan's death  the city passed on to his son  Sultan Ibrāhīm Lodī. He ruled his Sultanate from Agra until he fell fighting to Mughal padshah (emperor) Bābar in the First battle of Panipat fought in 1526.The golden age of the city began with the Mughals. It was known then as Akbarabād and remained the capital of the Mughal Empire under the padshahs (emperors) Akbar  Jahāngīr and Shāh Jahān. Akbar made it the eponymous seat of one of his original twelse subahs (imperial top-level provinces)  bordering (Old) Delhi  Awadh (Oudh)  Allahabad  Malwa and Ajmer subahs. Shāh Jahān later shifted his capital to Shāhjahānabād in the year 1649.Since Akbarabād was one of the most important cities in India under the Mughals  it witnessed a lot of building activity. Babar  the founder of the Mughal dynasty  laid out the first formal Persian garden on the banks of river Yamuna. The garden is called the Arām Bāgh or the Garden of Relaxation. His grandson Akbar the Great raised the towering ramparts of the Great Red Fort  besides making Agra a centre for learning  arts  commerce and religion. Akbar also built a new city on the outskirts of Akbarabād called Fatehpūr Sikrī. This city was built in the form of a Mughal military camp in stone.His son Jahāngīr had a love of gardens and flora and fauna and laid many gardens inside the Red Fort or Lāl Qil'a. Shāh Jahān  known for his keen interest in architecture  gave Akbarabād its most prized monument  the Tāj Mahal. Built in loving memory of his wife Mumtāz Mahal  the mausoleum was completed in 1653.Shāh Jahān later shifted the capital to Delhi during his reign  but his son Aurangzeb moved the capital back to Akbarabād  usurping his father and imprisoning him in the Fort there. Akbarabād remained the capital of India during the rule of Aurangzeb until he shifted it to Aurangabad in the Deccan in 1653.After the decline of the Mughal Empire  the city came under the influence of Marathas and was called Agra  before falling into the hands of the British Raj in 1803.In 1835 when the Presidency of Agra was established by the British  the city became the seat of government  and just two years later it was witness to the Agra famine of 1837–38. During the Indian rebellion of 1857 British rule across India was threatened  news of the rebellion had reached Agra on 11 May and on 30 May two companies of native infantry  the 44th and 67th regiments  rebelled and marched to Delhi. The next morning native Indian troops in Agra were forced to disarm  on 15 June Gwalior (which lies south of Agra) rebelled. By 3 July  the British were forced to withdraw into the fort. Two days later a small British force at Sucheta were defeated and forced to withdraw  this led to a mob sacking the city. However  the rebels moved onto Delhi which allowed the British to restore order by 8 July. Delhi fell to the British in September  the following month rebels who had fled Delhi along with rebels from Central India marched on Agra but were defeated. After this British rule was again secured over the city until the independence of India in 1947. Agra is the birthplace of the religion known as Dīn-i Ilāhī  which flourished during the reign of Akbar and also of the Radhaswami Faith  which has around two million followers worldwide. Agra has historic linkages with Shauripur of Jainism and Runukta of Hinduism  of 1000 BC.The Tāj Mahal  Agra Fort and Fatehpur Sikri are all UNESCO World Heritage Sites.Air India flies the following sectors in Agra airport:Delhi - Varanasi - Agra (Monday  Wednesday  Saturday)Agra - Khajuraho - Varanasi - Delhi (Monday  Wednesday  Saturday)Mumbai - Agra - Mumbai (Tuesday  Thursday)As of now Air India connects Agra to the rest of the world via Mumbai  Delhi 5 days a week. These flights are usually on time and observe full load factor. Agra still needs many more daily flights to Bangalore  Kolkata  Jaipur  Goa  Kochi  Delhi  Mumbai  Lucknow  Varanasi and other tourist destinations within the country. Many airlines are showing interest to start services from Agra in near future.A new greenfield international airport is proposed for Agra in a bid to give required fillip to tourism in Uttar Pradesh. Taj International Airport project at Agra would be implemented in right earnest with the state government according top priority to this project as Taj Mahal is one of the most visited tourist spots in the world.Consortium of Rites Ltd and KPMG Advisory Services Pvt Ltd  the selected consultants for this project  made a detailed presentation to Infrastructure and Industrial Development Commissioner (IIDC)  Anil Kumar Gupta on the future course of action. Consultants were asked to identify the best suited site by the end of the current financial year.The project site would be selected in a way so as to enable prompt clearances and approvals for the implementation without any hindrances. To be developed through Public Private Partnership (PPP)  in order to ensure time-bound execution of the project  the government has assured full co-operation at all levels of administration. Development of an international airport near the Taj Mahal will enhance the tourist inflow  the new airport would also cater to needs of frequent fliers  entrepreneurs and exporters from the region. If everything goes to plan  Agra will have an international airport within four to five years.Agra is on the central train line between Delhi (Station Code: NDLS) and Bombay (Station Code: CSTM) and between Delhi and Madras (Station Code: MAS) and many trains like Bhopal Shatabdi  Taj Express  Bhopal Express  Malwa Express  Gondwana Express  Jabalpur - Jammutawi Express  Shreedham Express  Garib Rath  Tamil Nadu Express  Chennai Rajdhani  Allahabad Mathura Express etc. connect Agra with all major Indian cities like New Delhi  Bombay  Calcutta  Madras  Visakhapatnam  Hyderabad  Bengaluru  Pune  Bhopal  Indore  Kochi  Gwalior  Jabalpur  Ujjain  Jaipur  Aligarh  Mathura  Alwar  Lucknow  Thiruvananthapuram etc. every day. Some east-bound trains from Delhi also travel via Agra  so direct connections to points in Eastern India (including Calcutta are also available. There are close to 20 trains to New Delhi and Gwalior Junction every day  and at least three or four to Bhopal  Indore  Nagpur  Bombay and Madras. There are three main railway stations in Agra.Railway Stations served by the Indian Railways network at Agra are:In July 2014  a trial run of a  semi-high speed train  with 10 coaches and 2 generators reached a speed of 160 km/h (99 mph) between New Delhi and Agra. The railways plan to introduce such trains commercially from November 2014. New Delhi Agra Shatabdi Express is same type of train  which takes 2 hours to complete its journey. A new semi-high speed train Gatimaan Express that reduces travel time between Delhi and Agra to 100 minutes has been started from 5 April 2016.Idgah Bus Stand  Taj Depot  Ford Depot and Inter State Bus Terminal (ISBT) are the major bus stands in Agra  connecting Agra to most of the bigger cities in North India. It is a major junction of highways with 3 national highways and 2 expressway (Yamuna Expressway & Agra Lucknow Expressway) originating from Agra. Another national highway passes through the city bringing the total highway outlet to 7.Bus services are run by the Agra Municipal Corporation. Other para-transit modes include rickshaws and autorickshaws. While passengers need to negotiate rates for the rickshaws and they are usually expensive  there is a system of (what is called) 'Tempo' which are autorickshaws that run on specific routes called out by the drivers. Tempos take around 6 people simultaneously and work out to be the most economical and practical. Polluting vehicles are not allowed near the Tāj Mahal  so one needs to take electric autos or Tanga (Tonga) from a few kilometres outside the Tāj Mahal.   is located at Agra Cantt railways station.Taj Mahal  Agra Fort and Akbar's Tomb  besides many other landmarks of the city will now have metro rail connectivity. The feasibility report submitted by Rail India Technical and Economic Service (RITES) has proposed 30 stations  11 underground and 19 elevated  for two corridors of the Metro Rail in the city in the first phase. The two routes are Sikandra to Taj Mahal East gate via Agra Fort and Agra Cantt to Kalindi Vihar. On 24 March 2017  State Chief Minister Aditya Nath Yogi approved the Agra Metro project.The Taj Mahal is one of the most famous buildings in the world  the mausoleum of Shah Jahan's favourite wife  Mumtaz Mahal. It is one of the New Seven Wonders of the world  and one of the three World Heritage Sites in Agra. Agra is commonly identified as the  City of Taj . Completed in 1653  the Tāj Mahal was built by the Mughal king Shah Jahan as the final resting place for his beloved wife  Mumtāz Mahal. Finished in marble  it is perhaps India's most beautiful monument. This perfectly symmetrical monument took 22 years (1630–1652) of labour and 20 000 workers  masons and jewellers to build[citation needed] and is set amidst landscaped gardens. Built by the Persian architect  Ustād 'Īsā  the Tāj Mahal is on the south bank of the Yamuna River. It can be observed from Agra Fort from where Emperor Shāh Jahān gazed at it for the last eight years of his life  a prisoner of his son Aurangzeb. It is an acknowledged masterpiece of symmetry.[citation needed] Verses of the Quran are inscribed on it and at the top of the gate are twenty-two small domes  signifying the number of years the monument took to build. The Tāj Mahal was built on a marble platform that stands above a sandstone one. The most elegant dome of the Tāj Mahal has a diameter of 60 feet (18 m)  and rises to a height of 80 feet (24 m); directly under this dome is the tomb of Mumtāz Mahal. Shah Jahān's tomb was erected next to hers by his son Aurangzeb. The interiors are decorated with fine inlay work  incorporating semi-precious stones.Agra Fort (sometimes called the Red Fort)  was commissioned by the conquering Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great in 1565  and is another of Agra's World Heritage Sites. A stone tablet at the gate of the Fort states that it had been built before 1000 but was later renovated by Akbar. The red sandstone fort was converted into a palace during Shāh Jahān's time  and reworked extensively with marble and pietra dura inlay. Notable buildings in the fort include the Pearl Mosque or Motī Masjid  the Dīwān-e-'Ām and Dīwān-e-Khās (halls of public and private audience)  Jahāngīr's Palace  Khās Mahal  Shīsh Mahal (mirrored palace)  and the Musamman Burj.[citation needed]The forbidding exteriors of this fort conceal an inner paradise. The fort is crescent shaped  flattened on the east with a long  nearly straight wall facing the river. It has a total perimeter of 2.4 kilometres (1.5 mi)  and is ringed by double castellated ramparts of red sandstone punctuated at regular intervals by bastions. A moat 9 metres (30 ft) wide and 10 metres (33 ft) deep surrounds the outer wall.Chhatrapati Shīvajī visited the Agra Fort  as a result of the conditions of the Treaty of Purandar entered into with Mirzā Rājā Jaisingh to meet Aurangzeb in the Dīwān-i-Khās (Special Audience Chamber). In the audience he was deliberately placed behind men of lower rank. An insulted Shīvajī stormed out of the imperial audience and was confined to Jai Sing's quarters on 12 May 1666. Fearing the dungeons and execution he escaped on 17 August 1666.The fort is a typical example of Mughal architecture  effectively showing how the North Indian style of fort construction differed from that of the South. In the South  the majority of forts were built on the seabed like the one at Bekal in Kerala. The Mughal Emperor Akbar built Fatehpūr Sikrī about 35 km (22 mi) from Agra  and moved his capital there. Later abandoned  the site displays a number of buildings of significant historical importance. A World Heritage Site  it is often visited by tourists. The name of the place came about after the Mughal Emperor Bābar defeated Rāṇā Sāngā in a battle at a place called Sikrī (about 40 km (25 mi) from Agra). Then the Mughal Emperor Akbar wanted to make Fatehpūr Sikrī his headquarters  so he built a majestic fort; due to shortage of water  however  he had to ultimately move his headquarters to Agra Fort.Buland Darwāza or 'the lofty gateway' was built by the great Mughal emperor  Akbar in 1601 CE. at Fatehpūr Sikrī. Akbar built the Buland Darwāza to commemorate his victory over Gujarat. The Buland Darwāza is approached by 52 steps. The Buland Darwāza is 53.63 metres (175.95 feet) high and 35 metres (115 feet) wide. it is made of red and buff sandstone  decorated by carving and black and white marble inlays. An inscription on the central face of the Buland Darwāza demonstrates Akbar's religious broadmindedness  it is a message from Jesus advising his followers not to consider this world as their permanent home.The Empress Nūr Jahān built I'timād-Ud-Daulah's Tomb  sometimes called the  Baby Tāj   for her father  Mirzā Ghiyās Beg  the Chief Minister of the Emperor Jahāngīr. Located on the left bank of the Yamuna river  the mausoleum is set in a large cruciform garden  criss-crossed by water courses and walkways. The area of the mausoleum itself is about 23 m2 (250 sq ft)  and is built on a base that is about 50 m2 (540 sq ft) and about one metre (3.3 feet) high. On each corner are hexagonal towers  about thirteen metres (43 feet) tall. Small in comparison to many other Mughal-era tombs  it is sometimes described as a jewel box. Its garden layout and use of white marble  pietra dura  inlay designs and latticework presage many elements of the Tāj Mahal.The walls are white marble from Rajasthan encrusted with semi-precious stone decorations – cornelian  jasper  lapis lazuli  onyx  and topaz in images of cypress trees and wine bottles  or more elaborate decorations like cut fruit or vases containing bouquets. Light penetrates to the interior through delicate jālī screens of intricately carved white marble.Many of Nūr Jahān's relatives are interred in the mausoleum. The only asymmetrical element of the entire complex are the tombs of her father and mother  which have been set side-by-side  a formation replicated in the Taj Mahal.[clarification needed]Sikandra  the last resting place of the Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great  is on the Delhi-Agra Highway  only 13 kilometres (8.1 miles) from the Agra Fort. Akbar's tomb reflects the completeness of his personality. The vast  beautifully carved  red-ochre sandstone tomb with deers  rabbits and langurs is set amidst a lush garden. Akbar himself planned his own tomb and selected a suitable site for it. To construct a tomb in one's lifetime was a Turkic custom which the Mughals followed religiously. Akbar's son Jahāngīr completed construction of this pyramidal tomb in 1613. The 99 names of Allah have been inscribed on the tomb.The Jāma Masjid is a large mosque attributed to Shah Jahan's daughter  Princess Jahanara Begum  built in 1648  notable for its unusual dome and absence of minarets. The inscription at its entrance shows that it cost Rs 5 Lakhs at that time for its completion.Notable for its Persian influenced dome of blue glazed tiles  the Chīnī kā Rauza is dedicated to the Prime Minister of Shāh Jahān  'Allāma Afzal Khāl Mullā Shukrullāh of Shiraz.The oldest Mughal garden in India  the Rām Bāgh was built by the Emperor Bābar in 1528 on the bank of the Yamuna. It lies about 2.34 km (1 mi) north of the Tāj Mahal. The pavilions in this garden are designed so that the wind from the Yamuna  combined with the greenery  keeps them cool even during the peak of summer. The original name of the gardens was Ārām Bāgh  or 'Garden of Relaxation'  and this was where the Mughal emperor Bābar used to spend his leisure time and where he eventually died. His body was kept here for some time before sending it to Kabul.On Ram Bagh to Tundla road near Etmadpur  there is a famed Yoga Ashram of Mahaprabhu Ramlal ji Maharaja(First Guru Gaddi)  Yogeshwar Mulakhraj Ji Maharaja(Second Guru Gaddi) & Yogeshwar DeviDayal Ji Mahadev(Third GuruGaddi) blessed Swami Chandra Mohan Ji Maharaj named Shri Siddha Gufa Sawai. Thousands of devotees and seekers visit this holy place.Mariams Tomb  is the tomb of Mariam  the wife of great Mughal Emperor Akbar. The tomb is within the compound of the Christian Missionary Society.The Mehtāb Bāgh  or 'Moonlight Garden'  is on the opposite bank of the River Yamuna from the Tāj Mahal.Also known as Sur Sarovar  Keetham Lake is situated about 7 kilometres (4.3 miles) from the Akbar tomb in Agra  within the Surdas Reserved Forest. The lake has an impressive variety of aquatic life and water birds.The Mughal Heritage Walk is a part of community development programme being implemented with support of Agra Municipal corporation  USAID and an NGO; Center for Urban and Regional Excellence. It seeks to build sustainable livelihoods for youth and women from low resource communities and improve their living environments through infrastructure services and integration within the city.The Mughal Heritage Walk is a one-kilometre (0.62-mile) loop which connects the agricultural fields with the Rajasthani culture  river bank connected with the ancient village of Kuchhpura  the Heritage Structure of Mehtab Bagh  the Mughal aqueduct system  the Humanyun Mosque and the Gyarah Sidi.The Mankameshwar Temple is one of four ancient temples dedicated to Lord Shiva located on the four corners of Agra City. It is located near the Jāma Masjid and is about 2.5 kilometres (1.6 miles) from the Tāj Mahal and less than 1 km (0.6 mi) from Agra Fort. Being located in the old city  the temple is surrounded by markets  many of which date back to the Mughal Era.It is widespreadly considered to be the birthplace of great poet Mirza Ghalib. It is located near the Mankameshwar Temple and is about 3 kilometres (1.9 miles) from the Tāj Mahal and less than 1 km (0.6 mi) from Agra Fort. Being located in the old city  the College is surrounded by markets. Approximately four or five years back  the birth room of Mirza Ghalib was hidden behind the wall by the Management of the college to keep the identity of the place secret.[citation needed]Guru ka Tal was originally a reservoir meant to collect and conserve rainwater built in Agra  near Sikandra  during Jahangir's reign next to the Tomb of I'tibār Khān Khwājasara in 1610. In the 1970s a gurudwara was erected here. Guru ka Tal is a holy place of worship for the Sikhs. Four of the ten Sikh Gurus are said to have paid it a visit. Enjoying both historical and religious importance  this shrine attracts a large number of devotees and tourists. Boasting elaborate stone carvings and eight of the twelve original towers. It is located by national (Delhi-Agra) highway-2.The Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Agra.Paliwal Park  during the British Raj was known as Hewitt Park  is now renamed in memory of Shri Krishna Datta Paliwal  who was the first finance minister of Uttar Pradesh  when Shri Govind Ballabh Pant was the Chief Minister of the State.Paliwal Park is located in the heart of Agra  spread over an area of around 70 acres (280 000 m2). It also has a small lake and a vast variety of trees.Paliwal Park links the residential areas of Vijay Nagar Colony & Gandhi Nagar to the financial Hub of the city i.e. Sanjay Place.John's Public Library  also known as the Agra Municipal Library  is also located here and one can find rare books on diverse topics here.Many people come here for morning walk  as a result this place is full especially during the summer holidays when youngsters play all sort of different games.Due to the presence of the Taj Mahal and other historic monuments  Agra has a booming tourism industry as well as royal crafts like Pietra Dura  marble inlay and carpets.Today 40% of the population depends largely on agriculture  and others on the leather and footwear business and iron foundries. Agra is the second most self-employed in India in 2007  behind Varanasi  followed by Bhopal  Indore and Patna. According to the National Sample Survey Organization  in 1999–2000  431 of every 1 000 employed males were self-employed in the city  which grew to 603 per 1 000 in 2004–05.  Tourism contributes to the economy of Agra. Agra is home to Asia’s largest spa called Kaya Kalp – The Royal Spa  at the Hotel Mughal in Agra. Agra has many industries. Uttar Pradesh's first plant biotech company Harihar Biotech is located near the Taj. There are about 7 000 small scale industrial units. Agra city is also known for its leather goods  the oldest and famous leather firm Taj Leather World is in Sadar bazar . The carpets  handicrafts  zari and zardozi (embroidery work)  marble and stone carving and inlay work. Agra is known for its sweets (Petha and Gajak) and snacks (Dalmoth)  garment manufacturers and exporters and an automobile industry. Carpet making was introduced to the city by Moghul Emperor Babur and since then this art has flourished.The city centre place at Agra has jewellery and garments shops. The silver and gold jewellery hub is at Choube Ji Ka Fatak. The Shah Market area is an electronics market while Sanjay Place is the trade centre of Agra.Property is one of the growing sectors of the Agra's economy.There are several malls such as Big Bazzar  TDI Mall  Pacific Mall  Ratan Mall  Omaxe SRK Mall  Ashoka Mall (Sanjay Place).Agra ranked fifth on both the financial penetration index  which measures things like the presence of ATMs and bank branches  and on the consumption index  indicating the city’s transformation into an urban town. There are many new buildings  shopping complexes  malls  roads  flyovers and apartments coming up. On the India City Competitiveness Index  the city ranked 26th in 2010   32nd in 2011  and 37th in 2012 It was during the advent of the Mughal era that Agra grew as a centre of Islamic education. British people introduced the western concept of education in Agra. In the year 1823  Agra College  one of the oldest colleges in India was formed out of a Sanskrit school established by the Scindia rulers. In the British era  Agra became a great centre of Hindi literature with people like Babu Gulab Rai at the helm.Agra University was established on 1 July 1927 and catered to colleges spread across the United Provinces  the Rajputana  the Central Provinces and almost to entire North India  at present 10 institutes comprising various departments and around 700 Colleges are affiliated to this university. The historic Agra University was later rechristened as Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar University by the then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh  Ms. Mayawati. Agra is home to the Dainik Jagran newspaper. which is the most read Hindi newspaper in India. Other newspapers that are widely read include Amar Ujala  Aaj  Hindustan The Sea Express  Deepsheel Bharat  DLA. The English dailies published are The Times of India  Hindustan Times  Economic Times  The Pioneer  etc. The Urdy dailies published are Prabhanjan Sanket  Inksaaf etc. There is also the Hindi and English mixed newspaper tabloid I-NEXT.Morphers Animation Studios LLP is an animation studio in Agra  which caters 3d visualisation services to clients. State-owned All India Radio has a local station in Agra which transmits various programs of mass interest. There are two private FM radio stations  92.7 BIG FM (Reliance Broadcast Network Limited)and Radio Mantra 91.9 FM (Shri Puran Multimedia). There is a community Radio Station 90.4 FM.Ram Barat (Hindi: राम बारात) is a part of Ramlila celebration in Agra. It is one of the biggest annual events in North India. Ram Barat literally means Baraat Marriage procession of Sri Ram. Every year a new locality is chosen in Agra and is elaborately decorated with lights & flowers. The area is given a major face lift befitting the venue for the divine marriage.Taj Literature Festival saw stars of the literary world manifest themselves on the earth of Agra. The galaxy included the stalwarts  Muzaffar Ali  Shobha De  Prahlad Kakker and Raghu Rai. The stage shone brilliant and the heritage city breathed life . This festival  an attempt to rejuvenate that aesthetic spirit which is a soul of this historically rich city  Agra. The city that nurtured the likes of Ghalib  Tansen  Surdas  Nazeer and many more.The Kailash Fair is held in the town of Kailash  about 12 km (7 mi) from Agra  in the month of August/September. It is a major fair celebrated in honour of Lord Shiva who is believed to have appeared here in the form of stone Lingam.Gokulpura / Moti Katra  AgraThe museum-cum-public library is housed in an old heritage structure  built in 1922 and renovated in the 1940s. Queen Victori's bronze statue's are also exposed in this Museum. The other old statues and memories of the Mughal Era are exposed for the attraction of tourists  something new other than usual attraction.Great Poet Soordas  Acharya Pt. Shri Ram Sharma  Abul Fazal  Amrit Lal Nagar  Rangey Raghav  Dr Ramvilas Sharma  Babu Gulab Roy  Rajendra Yadav  Mirza Galib  Mir Taqi Mir  Nazir Akbarabadi Motilal Nehru Actress Nimmi  Raj Babbar  Prof (Dr) Deoki NandanNand Ram Ka TilaAgra Fort is a historical fort in the city of Agra in India. It was the main residence of the emperors of the Mughal Dynasty till 1638  when Mughal capital was shifted from Agra to Red Fort in Delhi. It is also a UNESCO World Heritage site  and is about 2.5 km northwest of its more famous sister monument  the Taj Mahal. The fort can be more accurately described as a walled city.[citation needed]
After the First Battle of Panipat in 1526  the victorious Babur stayed in the fort  in the palace of Ibrahim Lodi. He later built a baoli (step well) in it. The emperor Humayun was crowned in the fort in 1530. Humayun was defeated at Bilgram in 1540 by Sher Shah. The fort remained with the Suris till 1555  when Humayun recaptured it. Adil Shah Suri's general  Hemu  recaptured Agra in 1556 and pursued its fleeing governor to Delhi where he met the Mughals in the Battle of Tughlaqabad. Realising the importance of its central situation  Akbar made it his capital and arrived in Agra in 1558. His historian  Abu'l-Fazl  recorded that this was a brick fort known as 'Badalgarh'. It was in a ruined condition and Akbar had it rebuilt with red sandstone from Barauliu area in Rajasthan. Architects laid the foundation and it was built with bricks in the inner core with sandstone on external surfaces. Some 4 000 builders worked on it daily for eight years  completing it in 1573. It was only during the reign of Akbar's grandson  Shah Jahan  that the site took on its current state. Legend has it that Shah Jahan built the beautiful Taj Mahal in the memory of his wife  Mumtaz Mahal. Unlike his grandfather  Shah Jahan tended to have buildings made from white marble. He destroyed some of the earlier buildings inside the fort to make his own.[citation needed]At the end of his life  Shah Jahan was deposed and restrained by his son  Aurangzeb  in the fort. It is rumoured that Shah Jahan died in Muasamman Burj  a tower with a marble balcony with a view of the Taj Mahal.[citation needed]The fort was invaded and captured by the Maratha Empire in the early 18th century. Thereafter  it changed hands between the Marathas and their foes many times. After their catastrophic defeat at Third Battle of Panipat by Ahmad Shah Abdali in 1761  Marathas remained out of the region for the next decade. Finally Mahadji Shinde took the fort in 1785. It was lost by the Marathas to the British during the Second Anglo-Maratha War  in 1803.[citation needed]The fort was the site of a battle during the Indian rebellion of 1857  which caused the end of the British East India Company's rule in India  and led to a century of direct rule of India by Britain.[citation needed]The 380 000-square-metre (94-acre) fort has a semicircular plan  its chord lies parallel to the river and its walls are seventy feet high. Double ramparts have massive circular bastions at intervals  with battlements  embrasures  machicolations and string courses. Four gates were provided on its four sides  one Khizri gate opening on to the river.[citation needed]Two of the fort's gates are notable: the  Delhi Gate  and the  Lahore Gate.  The Lahore Gate is also popularly also known as the  Amar Singh Gate   for Amar Singh Rathore.[citation needed]The monumental Delhi Gate  which faces the city on the western side of the fort  is considered the grandest of the four gates and a masterpiece of Akbar's time. It was built circa 1568 both to enhance security and as the king's formal gate  and includes features related to both. It is embellished with inlay work in white marble. A wooden drawbridge was used to cross the moat and reach the gate from the mainland; inside  an inner gateway called Hathi Pol ( Elephant Gate ) – guarded by two life-sized stone elephants with their riders – added another layer of security. The drawbridge  slight ascent  and 90-degree turn between the outer and inner gates make the entrance impregnable. During a siege  attackers would employ elephants to crush a fort's gates. Without a level  straight run-up to gather speed  however  something prevented by this layout  elephants are ineffective.[citation needed]Because the Indian military (the Parachute Brigade in particular) is still using the northern portion of the Agra Fort  the Delhi Gate cannot be used by the public. Tourists enter via the Amar Singh Gate.[citation needed]The site is very important in terms of architectural history. Abul Fazal recorded that five hundred buildings in the beautiful designs of Bengal and Gujarat were built in the fort. Some of them were demolished by Shahjahan to make way for his white marble palaces. Most of the others were destroyed by the British between 1803 and 1862 for raising barracks. Hardly thirty Mughal buildings have survived on the south-eastern side  facing the river. Of these  the Delhi Gate and Akbar Gate and one palace –  Bengali Mahal  – are representative Akbari buildings.[citation needed]Akbar Darwazza (Akbar Gate) was renamed Amar Singh Gate by the British. The gate is similar in design to the Delhi Gate. Both are built of red sandstone.[citation needed]The Bengali Mahal is built of red sandstone and is now split into Akbari Mahal and Jahangiri mahal.[citation needed]Plan of Agra Fort on display at the fort  2008Agra Fort inscriptionExterior of Diwan-i-Am or Hall of Public AudienceInterior of Agra Fort Diwan I Am (Hall of Public Audience)Agra Fort Diwan I Am (Hall of Public Audience)Jahangir PalaceDiwan-e-KhasDelhi gate  by Seeta Ram  1814–15Agra Fort insidesDecorated columnDecorations on the ceilingWeeks Edwin Gate of the Fortress at Agra IndiaInside the Fort's extensive compoundAgra district is one of the 75 districts of Uttar Pradesh state of India  and the historical city of Agra is the district headquarters. Agra district is a part of Agra division.Agra district is bounded by Mathura District on the north  Dholpur District of Rajasthan state on the south  Firozabad District on the east and Bharatpur District of Rajasthan State on the west. Area of the district is 4027 km².Agra district comprises 6 tehsils. The tehsils are Etmadpur  Agra  Kiraoli  Kheragarh  Fatehabad and Bah. The headquarters of the district is Agra city. The district consists of 15 blocks  namely Etmadpur  Khandauli  Shamshabad  Fatehabad  Jagner  Kheragarh  Saiyan  Achhnera  Akola  Bichpuri  Fatehpur Sikri  Barauli Ahir  Bah  Pinahat and Jaitpur Kalan. The division comprises 3 Lok Sabha constituencies namely Jalesar  Firozabad and Agra. There are 9 Vidhan Sabha constituencies in the district. They are Bah  Fatehabad  Etmadpur  Dayal Bagh  Agra Cantonment  Agra East  Agra West  Kheragarh and Fatehpur Sikri.According to the 2011 census Agra district has a population of 4 380 793   roughly equal to the nation of Moldova  or the US state of Kentucky.  This gives it a ranking of 41st in India (out of a total of 640).  The district has a population density of 1 084 inhabitants per square kilometre (2 810/sq mi) .  Hindus are 88.77% and Muslims are 9.30% in Agra district.  Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was 21%.  Agra has a sex ratio of 859 females for every 1000 males   and a literacy rate of 69.44%. Languages spoken include Braj Bhasha  which is a rural dialect of Hindi  predominant in the nebulous Braj region centred on Mathura and Agra in Uttar Pradesh and Dholpur & Bharatpur in Rajasthan . It is the predominant language in the central stretch of the Ganges-Yamuna Doab.Coordinates: 27°05′N 77°58′E﻿ / ﻿27.083°N 77.967°E﻿ / 27.083; 77.967Shamsabad is a city and a municipal board in Agra district in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.Shamsabad is located at27°01′N 78°08′E﻿ / ﻿27.02°N 78.13°E﻿ / 27.02; 78.13.  It has an average elevation of 165 metres (541 feet).As of 2001[update] India census   Shamsabad had a population of 27 260. Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Shamsabad has an average literacy rate of 52%  lower than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 60%  and female literacy is 42%. In Shamsabad  18% of the population is under 6 years of age.Jain Temple in Shamsabad(Agra)National Bank in Shamsabad(Agra)Inter College in Shamsabad(Agra)Best Computer Institute in Shamsabad (Agra)Agra Airport (IATA: AGR  ICAO: VIAG) is a military airbase and public airport serving the city of Agra  in the state of Uttar Pradesh  India. The air force station is one of the largest airbase of the Indian Air Force (IAF) and has been synonymous with the Taj Mahal for over half a century. On 15 August 2007  the airbase celebrated its sixtieth anniversary. The airbase was also featured in the 2013 Walt Disney Pictures movie - Planes as a pit stop for the Wings Across The World race.[citation needed]The station was opened during World War II as Royal Air Forces Station Agra and had a number of flying units located there. It was closed after the war and transferred to the Royal Indian Air Force (RIAF). The prefix Royal was later dropped and the station was later renamed. Air Force Station Agra was established on 15 August 1947 and placed under the command of Wing Commander Shivdev Singh  who was the incumbent commander of the No. 12 Sqn. Based on the then present system of Commands  the airfield fell under the responsibility of the Western Air Command (WAC). The base remained under this Theatre Command for the next two decades. In July 1971 it was transferred to the Central Air Command (CAC)  where it remains today.The airfield has remained unchanged  although many of the aircraft  squadrons  officers  and men have come and gone. During its sixty-year history with the IAF  it has seen the likes of C-47 Dakotas  C-119 Packets  HS 748 'Avros'  AN-12s  AN-32s  IL-76s  Canberras  IL-78 MKI and now the Airborne Early Warning and Control/AWACS. Today  it is hard to find a transport pilot who has not been at Air Force Station Agra at least sometime during his career; this trend will undoubtedly continue well into the future.The station now has the honour of holding the first inflight refueling aircraft Squadron in IAF service  with No 78 ‘Mid Air Refuelling Squadron’ (MARS) Squadron flying the IL-78MKIs.During World War II  the United States Army Air Forces Air Technical Service Command established a major maintenance and supply facility at Agra  named  Agra Air Depot . The 3rd Air Depot Group serviced a wide variety of fighter  bomber and transport aircraft being used by Tenth Air Force and the Allied ground forces in Burma and Fourteenth Air Force in China. The depot stockpiled large amounts of material for shipment over the Himalayan Mountains ( The Hump ) by Air Transport Command cargo aircraft flying to forward airfields in China. It also was a major stopover point on the ATC Karachi-Kunming air transport route.  The airport is mentioned in a chapter in Ernest Gann's Fate is The Hunter  wherein he relays a story of coming with feet of destroying the Taj Mahal in a severely overloaded C-87 after takeoff. No. 50 Squadron IAF has been tasked with the operations of the newly inducted Beriev A-50E/I Airborne Early Warning and Control (AWACS) aircraft. The AWACS has been mounted on a specially designed IL-76 with advanced avionics & telecommunication systems.As of February 2017  Air India operates a direct service routed Delhi–Varanasi–Agra–Khajuraho. The return service departs Khajuraho for Varanasi  continuing on to Delhi. A new greenfield international airport is proposed for Agra in a bid to give required fillip to tourism in Uttar Pradesh  Taj international airport project at Agra would be implemented in right earnest with the state government according top priority to this project as Taj Mahal is one of the most visited tourist spots in the world. Consortium of Rites Ltd and KPMG Advisory Services Pvt Ltd  the selected consultants for this project  made a detailed presentation to Infrastructure and Industrial Development Commissioner(IIDC)  Anil Kumar Gupta on the future course of action. Consultants were asked to identify the best suited site by the end of the current financial year. The project site would be selected in a way so as to enable prompt clearances and approvals for the implementation without any hindrances. To be developed through Public Private Partnership (PPP)  in order to ensure time-bound execution of the project  the government has assured full cooperation at all levels of administration. Development of an international airport near the Taj Mahal will enhance the tourist inflow  the new airport would also cater to needs of frequent fliers  entrepreneurs and exporters from the region. If everything goes as per plan  Agra will have an international airport within 4 to 5 years.  This article incorporates public domain material from the Air Force Historical Research Agency website http://www.afhra.af.mil/.Home to one the Seven Wonders of the World the Taj Mahal  Agra is one of the most popular tourist destinations in India. It is as loved by Indians as it is by foreigners who throng here in large numbers to admire its beauty.  Along with Delhi and Jaipur  Agra forms the Golden Triangle of tourism in India. Situated in Uttar Pradesh  Agra is synonymous with the Taj Mahal however there’s lot more to the city than this world-famous monument. Right from the epic Mahabharata to the Mughal Dynasty  Agra has been monumental and has played a significant role in shaping India’s history. The city was first mentioned in Mahabharata as Agrevana which means the border of the forest. It was later established by Sikandar Lodi of the Lodi Dynasty in the sixteenth century who built many structures including forts  step wells  mosques  etc in Agra. He moved his capital from Delhi to Agra and after his death  his son ruled the city for nine years. Later  Sher Shah Suri ruled Agra and from 1556 to 1658 it was the capital of the Mughal Empire. Under the Mughal reign Agra was called Akbarabad and was ruled by greats like Akbar  Jehangir  Shah Jahan  etc. Their love for architecture  gardens and art and culture added a new dimension to Agra’s personality. From Persian gardens on the banks of the Yamuna to monuments and mausoleums  Agra’s golden age started during their rule. It was after the decline of the Mughal Empire and during the reign of the Marathas that Akbarabad became Agra. By 1803  it came under the British Raj that remained strong for most part until India gained independence in 1947.What also shaped Agra’s culture were the different religions that were born and flourished here. From Din-i-Ilahi to the Radhaswami Faith  these beliefs had followers from Akbar’s time. Runukta of Hinduism and Shauripur of Jainism too have their links to Agra.With so many prominent rulers having ruled the city  Agra is home to several important monuments including three UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Taj Mahal  Agra Fort and Fatehpur Sikri. A trip to Agra is incomplete without paying a visit to these that will take you back to an era of its glorious past.ALSO READ 5 reasons to visit AgraGETTING THEREAgra is well-connected by road  rail and air with most parts of the country as it is a prime tourist destination. Interestingly  it is 210 km away from the state capital Lucknow and only 125 km away from Delhi. The city is on the banks of the River Yamuna and enjoys a healthy influx of tourists all year round.Agra’s Kheria Airport is 12.5 km away from the heart of the city and you can avail of taxis once you land. There are four main railway heads in Agra: Agra Cantonment  Agra Fort  Idgah Agra Junction and Raja ki Mandi. Trains from most cities halt at one of these railway stations. India’s fastest train  the Gatimaan Express that runs between Delhi and Agra in flat 100 minutes is also an option for tourists. It also offers travel itineraries for one  two or more days. You can also drive down to Agra from different parts of the county. The Yamuna Expressway is one of the fastest routes to reach Agra from Delhi. If you don’t have your own vehicle  you can even avail of private cabs that ply on this expressway. Buses also ply from cities like Delhi  Lucknow  Jaipur and Gwalior to Agra. The main bus stops in the city are Taj Depot  Inter State Bus Terminal  Ford Depot and Idgah Bus Stand. The government has insured that reaching Agra is not a hassle as it generates a major chunk of tourism for the state.ALSO SEE Honeymoon in Agra: Best places to stay and visit in the city of loveSIGHTSEEING ATTRACTIONS IN AGRAAgra was the seat of the Mughal Empire and is peppered with some great architectural marvels of their times. While Taj Mahal garners the most amount of interest  when in Agra  it is important to pay a visit to some of the city’s other exemplary structures. Once you are done admiring the wonder that is Taj Mahal  move on to other important sites  some in its vicinity and some a little further away from it. From Akbar’s Tomb to Agra Fort and the walled city of Fatehpur Sikri  Agra is home to some important monuments that tell the story of India’s history. Take a day out to explore these gems that Agra has to offer.Taj MahalThe very first thing every tourist who comes to Agra wants to do is see the beauty that is Taj Mahal. No matter how many times you’ve been here  it will leave you mesmerized with its intricate carvings and architecture. The Taj Mahal is certainly the main attraction that draws millions of tourists to Agra every year and rightly so. Called the epitome of love  it was constructed by Shah Jahan for his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal whose tomb rests right under the central dome of the monument. It took 22 years and over 20 000 workers to construct this marvel. Shah Jahan spent his last years imprisoned in the Agra Fort gazing at his creation and after his death  his tomb was placed inside the Taj Mahal next to his wife. The white marble monument is an architectural marvel with fine detailing  on the south bank of the Yamuna River. Verses from the Holy Quran are inscribed on it  gemstones adorn its walls and the intricate inlay work adds a touch of magnificence to the structure. Another brilliant fact that makes it a masterpiece is its symmetry  which is why it looks the same from all four sides.ALSO SEE 5 facts about Taj Mahal you probably didn’t knowBeing one of the Seven Wonders of the World and the only one in India doesn’t stop from wrong stories floating around the Taj Mahal. Ones like the Taj Mahal was also to be built in black marble or that Shah Jahan dismembered the arms of the artisans who built the monument are pretty common but not really true. But one true and fascinating story  is that Agra was not the first choice to build the Taj Mahal. Yes  the world famous monument was originally planned to be constructed in Madhya Pradesh in Burhanpur because Mumtaz Mahal passed away there. Shah Jahan had even marked out the site along the Tapti River where it was to be built but the plan was shelved when Burhanpur was unable to supply enough white marble that was required for its construction. And so  Agra got its iconic monument that we call the Taj Mahal.Admire its striking beauty yourself when here. The Taj Mahal is open for visitors between 6 am to 6 pm but remains shut on Fridays. The entry fee for Indians is Rs 20 and for foreign nationals it is Rs 750. According to one legend  if you walk away from the Taj Mahal and look back  you are likely to come back for another visit. Would you?ALSO SEE 8 magnificent photos of the Taj MahalAgra FortAnother architectural jewel in this city is the Agra Fort  a UNESCO World Heritage Site. It was built by Mughal Emperor Akbar with the help of 4 000 workers who worked for eight years to finish its construction in 1573. Agra Fort is made of red sandstone and was the seat of the Mughal Empire. Some of the major attractions in Agra Fort that will leave you mesmerized are structures like the Sheesh Mahal  Moti Mahal  Jehangir’s Palace and Khas Mahal. The fort has four large gate of which the Delhi Gate was used for the king’s formal entry. Diwan-i-Khas and Diwan-i-Aam were reserved for royal audience and the public respectively.Agra Fort has been prominent during the Mughal reign. Even though Akbar built it  during the rule of Shah Jahan  he renovated it by adding marble work and converting the raw red sandstone structure to a palace. Years later  his son Aurangzeb imprisoned him in the same fort at Mussaman Burj. Do pay a visit to this part of the fort as it offers one of the best views of the Taj Mahal. Despite these changes  Agra Fort is an epitome of Mughal architecture at its best and shouldn’t be missed.Agra Fort is open to tourists all days of the week from 7 am to 6 pm. For Indians  the entry fee is Rs 20 while for foreigners it is Rs 300. It is spread across 94 acres so you will need about two hours to explore the entire monument.Fatehpur SikriOne of Emperor Akbar’s pet projects was building a walled city a little away from Agra. He called it Fatehpur Sikri and even ruled here for sometime before he was forced to move out due to shortage of water supply. Nevertheless  the surviving monuments tell a tale of his valour and great work. Fateh in Persian signifies victory. The city survived and three of its walled sides are still intact. Akbar paid keen interest in its architecture and layout and it took about 15 years to plan and build it completely. Once ready  it had palaces  harems  buildings  courts and a mosque. But one of the best architectural wonders of Fatehpur Sikri is the Buland Darwaza  a grand gateway to the walled city. Made of red sandstone  there are 52 steps that lead up to its 175 ft high archway that has two inscriptions. Akbar’s favorite minister Birbal too has a monument in Fatehpur Sikri called Birbal’s house. Since he was a Hindu  the architecture is different than the usual Mughal buildings.ALSO SEE All you need to know about Buland DarwazaOne of the first buildings to be constructed in Fatehpur Sikri was the Jama Masjid  a mosque built according to Indian mosque architecture. It also houses the tomb of Salim Chishti  a great Sufi saint. Akbar  who was the founder of the faith Din-e-Ilahi also constructed Ibadat Khana in Fatehpur Sikri which was used for meetings. The Panch Mahal  a five-storey palatial structure was for the ladies and the Naubat Khana that had drummers announce the entry of the emperor were other unique structures in this city. Despite the lavish architecture and careful planning  Fatehpur Sikri was abandoned in 1585 after ruling it from 1571. This was because the lake that supplied water to the city dried up. Even so  it is worth marvelling the beauty of what a magnificent city this once was. Fatehpur Sikri is about 37 km away from Agra but can be completed on the same trip. Most of the city lies uninhabited and reminds one of its once glorious past. You can find a few budget hotels to stay at near the Fatehpur Sikri Railway Station. Don’t miss visiting this place as it is another UNESCO World Heritage Site.Akbar’s TombAkbar the Great built some majestic monuments in his lifetime and one of them was his tomb itself. The task of commissioning your own tomb is part of Turkic custom that Mughals adhered to. He even selected the site where he wanted to be kept. His last resting place  Sikandra is where Akbar’s Tomb is. His son Jehangir completed the construction of his father’s tomb in 1613 and it was beautifully carved  made of red sandstone. Just 1 km away from Akbar’s Tomb is Mariam’s Tomb  who was Akbar’s wife and Jehangir’s mother. The monument is open for visitors on all days of the week from 6 am to 6 pm. The entry fee for Indians is Rs 15 and for foreigners it is Rs 110.Mehtab BaghTranslating to moonlight garden  Mehtab Bagh is the perfect spot for admiring the beauty of the Taj Mahal. Built by Babur  it is a square garden that was once resplendent with pools  fountains and trees. Today  it makes for a recreational tourist spot. A Mughal garden  it is perfectly aligned with the Taj Mahal along the Yamuna River and was described by Shah Jahan as the ideal spot for viewing the Taj Mahal.Due to frequent floods and extraction of building material by the villagers  the garden lay in ruins by the ‘90s. However  the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) intervened and started work to restore the garden to its original state. They even made sure that the plants used in Mehtab Bagh were ones that were originally a part of Mughal gardens. These included guava  Ashoka  jamun  neem  hibiscus  etc. There were four sandstone towers too in the garden at its four corners  however  only one remains now. During the restoration  other structures were added to Mehtab Bagh that were not originally a part of it. Some of these include a statue of BR Ambedkar holding the constitution of India  a temple and nurseries. Visit Mehtab Bagh between 6 am to 7 pm  it is open on all days of the week. The entry fee for Indians is Rs 5 while for foreign nationals it is Rs 100.Mankameshwar MandirOne of the ancient Shiva temples in the country  Mankameshwar Mandir holds much religious importance as according to the legend  Shiva installed a lingam here on his own. The Mughal architecture isn’t the only thing that draws tourists to Agra  temples like these are also crowd-pullers. The temple is close to Agra Fort and near other tourist monuments like the Taj Mahal. As per the legend  Shiva wanted to go to Mathura after the birth of Krishna to get a glimpse of the little baby boy. During his descent from Mount Kailash  he rested and meditated at the sight of this temple and declared that if he is able to reach in time to see Krishna  he will install his swaroop here. And so  on his way back he kept his word and there was a lingam here covered in silver.Today  Shiva devotees come from different parts of the county to pay a visit to this temple. People have to climb down a flight of stairs to reach Mankameshwar Mandir’s sanctum sanctorum. It is surrounded by other idols of Shiva’s family and there are more temples behind this temple’s complex dedicated to other gods like Saraswati  Krishna  Hanuman and more.When here  you can light a deepak and make a wish as the temple gets its name from a wish-fulfilling temple that Shiva himself created. Also  try the paan outside which is usually triangular and covered in silver foil. Mankameshwar Mandir is open on all days from 7 am to 10 pm and entry to the temple is free for all.Tomb of Itimad-ud-DaulahAnother display of Mughal architecture  the Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah was commissioned by Nur Jahan  Jehangir’s wife  for her father Mirza Beg who was given the title of Itimad-ud-Daulah or pillar of the state. The mausoleum is often referred as the draft of Taj Mahal or Baby Taj as it has various elements that are identical to the Wonder of the World. It is also called a jewel box as it isn’t as grand as other Mughal structures yet there is no compromise on its intricacy.The Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah is made of white marble from Rajasthan and has semi-precious stones encrusted in its walls that display different objects such as a vase  bouquet  fruits  etc. Its construction began in 1622 and was completed in 1628. A garden criss-crossed by walkways and water courses surround the monument. It is located on the right bank of the Yamuna River and is a close replica of the Taj Mahal including its interiors. Mirza Beg’s tomb rests next to his wife’s tomb which was inspired by the Taj Mahal. Many of Nur Jahan’s relatives’ tombs are also kept in this monument.You can visit the Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah any day of the week between 6 am to 6 pm. The entry fee for Indians is Rs 10 and for foreigners it is Rs 250. Even though this is the smallest of the Mughal monuments  it is a must-visit when in Agra for its intricate work.Guru ka TalPeople of the Sikh community have another reason to visit Agra as it is home to Guru ka Tal. A reservoir from the Mughal era  Guru ka Tal became a religious place when a gurudwara was constructed here in 1970s. What makes it a holy pilgrimage destination is the fact that four out of the 10 Sikh gurus have visited this place in their lifetime. Being both a historical and religious site  it draws enough tourists as well as pilgrims.Guru ka Tal is also known for its stone carvings and towers that increase its beauty manifold. Even though it is a Sikh religious place  owing to its Mughal past  its architecture of red sandstone reminds us of its historical past. The gurudwara is built in the memory of Guru Tegh Bahadur Ji  the ninth Sikh guru who was martyred here during his fight for the freedom to practise one’s faith.Ram BaghThe first of the eleven Mughal gardens to be built  Ram Bagh was Babur’s idea and was initially called Amar Bagh that translates to garden of relaxation. Built in 1528 on the banks of River Yamuna  it is about 5 km away from the Taj Mahal. The idea of the garden was inspired from a Persian garden that represents the Islamic idea of paradise. Therefore  Ram Bagh had lush greenery with a river flowing through it. It has two viewing pavilions that were built in such a way that the cool breeze from the Yamuna and the trees would keep them cool even during peak summer season. Mughal Emperor Babur spent a lot of time in this garden and even died here. Before moving his body to Kabul  it was kept here for some time. Not just him  Emperor Akbar and his son Jehangir also spent their time in Ram Bagh. The present restored garden displays Nur Jahan’s skills as a garden designer.Kinari BazaarIf you love to shop and want to take back home something that will remind you of your Agra trip  head to Kinari Bazaar. A crowded market filled with shops selling some of the best local arts and crafts  Kinari Bazaar is behind Jama Masjid. You will have to brace yourself to walk through narrow lanes that are bursting with people to shop here. From shoes  fabrics  spices  jewellery to even marble work  you will find everything in this market. You can even sample local snacks at one of the many street shops. Kinari Bazaar opens at 11 am and shuts down by 9 pm. It is open all days of the week except Tuesdays. Keep this for later once you are done with sightseeing in Agra.BEST PLACES TO STAY IN AGRABeing a tourist spot  Agra offers accommodation for all types of budgets. It also has homestays and hostels if you do not want to shell out too much money. Budget accommodation can cost you anything from Rs 500 to Rs 1 000 and can be easily found around the Taj Mahal. However  accommodation at a low-end or budget hotel is not advisable as it could well be in one of the dirtier parts of the city.Mid-range hotels charge anywhere between Rs 1 000 to Rs 3 000  while tariff at luxury hotels can go Rs 3 000 upwards. The luxury hotels at Agra are among the best in the country and since Agra receives tourists all through the year it is advisable to book in advance.Among luxury stays  the Oberoi Amarvilas (0562 2231515) is one of the best with breathtaking views of the Taj Mahal from your hotel room. ITC Mughal (0562 4021700) is another royal stay that is close to the Taj Mahal. Ramada Plaza Agra (0562 7123500) and Radisson Blu Hotel (0562 4055555) are mid-range options. Hotel The Taj Vilas Agra (0562 2334466) and Hotel Alleviate (0562 2458800) are decent budget accommodations.BEST PLACES TO EAT IN AGRAFoodies will have a gala time sampling Agra’s cuisine. The city is bestknown for its petha  pedhas  gajak and dalmoth. Thanks to its Mughal past  Agra is also one of the best destinations to sample Mughlai cuisine.Peshawari at ITC Mughal (0562 4021700) serves one of the best north Indian and Mughlai food. It is on the lavish side and you can expect to shell out Rs 2500 for dinner for two here. The non-vegetarian fare here is lip-smacking. Pinch of Spice (0562 4045353) is a hole-in-the-wall place that serves amazing food. If you have a sweet tooth  drop by Panchi Petha Store (+91 7055500774) at Agra Cantt that is known for its wide range of pethas. From the regular ones to kesar  chocolate and paan flavoured pethas  this one is a must-try. Bhagat Halwai at Civil Lines (+91 9045123333) is another local shop you should visit for a taste of Indian chaat and some sweet treats. Don’t expect anything fancy from the ambience but the affordable and yummy food is what makes it popular among locals and tourists. Make sure you leave room for snacks like kachori and samosa in the evening that go well with tea and are a common delicacy in Agra.EVENTS AND FESTIVALS IN AGRAAgra is home to a number of festivals and events that take place throughout the year to give tourists a flavor of the city and something to remember than just its sightseeing attractions. Here are some of the top festivals celebrated in Agra every year.Taj MahotsavProbably the biggest celebration of the monument  Taj Mahotsav usually takes place in February every year. It started in 1992 as a means of attracting more tourists and giving them something more. The event takes place on a grand scale and lasts for a week or more. From local artisans selling their crafts to ghazal performances  poetry sessions  plays and dance and music performances by celebrities  you can expect to have a fun-filled time at Taj Mahotsav. Every year  the schedule for the festival is available online days prior to the event and you can choose to go on the day your favorite artist is performing. The event charges a nominal fee for Indian nationals and many of the sessions are even free. The month of February was chosen as the weather is usually pleasant and the influx of foreign tourists is usually high during this time.Taj Literature FestivalKeeping up with it legacy of culture and art  Taj Literature Festival celebrates the Agra and its greats by means of the written word. The event has seen some of the best in the industry come together to give the audience the best literary experience. In 2016  Taj Literature Festival took place in February. Verses of Agra’s legendary poets like Mirza Ghalib and Mir Taqi Mir to the influence of Sufi saints on the city were part of the festival in its previous years.Ram BaratOne of the biggest annual events not just in Agra but the whole of north India  Ram Barat is an annual marriage procession for Ram that is part of the Ramlila. Every year a new location is chosen in Agra and given a facelift to make it look fitting for the royal procession. What started almost 125 years ago by a businessman named Lala Kokamal is still held every year by his family. The procession lasts for three days and people from all parts of the county visit Agra to witness this carnival. The area chosen is given more funding to decorate it for the special occasion. Skilled craftsmen create giant structures like the Janak Mahal and streets are lit up for the procession. The preparations begin well in advance to ensure that things go smoothly. There is non-stop music and film theatres run movies all night long to keep the people who have come from other cities entertained. These three days are absolute fun for those who love such festivities.Kailash FairJust 12 km off Agra is a town called Kailash that houses the Kailash temple outside which the annual fair is organized in August or September. Kailash Fair is a fun-filled affair that attracts people of north India especially Shiva devotees. It is believed that Shiva himself paid a visit to Kailash in the form of a stone lingam. The fair is held every year to celebrate and pray to the lord and seek his blessings. Not just for religious people  Kailash Fair is one of the most colourful celebrations as the entire place is decorated and stalls are put up. Sweets  street food  arts  crafts  etc are available at these stalls and people throng in large numbers to be a part of it. They first pay a visit to the temple where they offer milk and flowers and then enjoy the revelry outside. Kailash Fair is perfect to witness one of the most colourful festivals of the country.NEARBY PLACES FROM AGRAAfter you are done with your Agra tour and you have a day or two in hand  you can visit nearby places close to the city. Uttar Pradesh is home to several other attractions that are not too far away from Agra. We recommend you that you take out time to visit these places too.MathuraLocated just 49 km away from Agra  Mathura is popular for being the birthplace of Krishna and for its celebration of Holi and Janmashtami. Not just this  a visit to Mathura is incomplete without sampling its sweets. The city is one of the seven in India that is believed to grant moksha.When in Mathura visit places like the Garbha Griha at the Sri Krishna Janmabhoomi Temple. It is believed to be a prison cell and the exact birthplace of Krishna. Vishram Ghat is another place of religious importance. According to mythology  this is where he rested after killing his maternal uncle Kansa. The Dwarkadhish Temple is not just a place of worship but is also known for its intricate architecture. Rangbhoomi is another place of interest as this is where the fight between Krishna and Kansa took place.VrindavanFor devotees of Krishna  the next stop is Vrindavan that is 55 km away from Agra. If Mathura was the birthplace of Krishna  Vrindavan was where he grew up. The entire city is a pilgrimage and one of the oldest cities in the world.When in Vrindavan  don’t miss a visit to the Banke Bihari Temple. It is one of the most popular one and the idols here are hidden from public view by a white curtain which is lifted every few minutes. It was built in 1864 and attracts a large number of devotees every year. The Jaigurudeo Temple is made of white marble resembling the Taj Mahal and has a strange custom of not accepting any donations from non-vegetarians. The ISKCON Group that has temples across India has one in Vrindavan too. Singing and dancing in praise of Krishna is quite common here.BharatpurSituated 54 km from Agra  Bharatpur is a haven for bird lovers as it houses the Bharatpur National Park and has over 300 species of birds including Siberian Cranes that migrate here in the winter. It was earlier a hunting ground for royals and the British but now offers a save environ for its flora and fauna. Ducks  hawks  flycatchers  larks  buntings  etc are a few of this park’s attractions. If you love history and architecture  Bharatpur has something in store for you too. It has regal forts and palaces such as the Deeg Palace which is a fortress built by Badan Singh. You will find beautiful gardens and fountains here.For a taste of both Mughal and Rajput architecture  head to Bharatpur Palace that is known for its exquisite floor work. There is a museum in the palace that has artefacts dating back to the second century and shouldn’t be missed. After this  visit the Lohagarh Fort that translates to iron fort. The British tried destroying it multiple times but it could not be broken and thus became a symbol of strength and victory.GwaliorA little further away  about 119 km away from Agra lies Gwalior which makes for a good weekend getaway from the city. Known for its architecture of majestic palaces  forts and temples  Gwalior is perfect for a family trip with kids. Music too is big part of Gwalior’s culture and it has the country’s first ever museum of musical instruments.One of the prime tourist attractions in Gwalior is the Gwalior Fort that offers majestic views of the valley. Perched on a hilltop  it makes for a majestic monument. The Scindia Museum is another attraction in the city and is in the Jai Vilas Palace. Visit the Kala Vithika museum for a taste of the culture and tradition of Madhya Pradesh.Delhi219 km away from the historical city of Agra lies India’s capital Delhi. A buzzing city with so much to offer  there is never enough time to explore it. However  you can still manage to see parts of it depending on your interests. Foodie  shopaholics or history lovers  Delhi has something for all and more. While covering all of it may not be possible  take your pick and enjoy as much as you can.Delhi is home to some of the most famous monuments in the country like the Red Fort  India Gate  Qutub Minar  etc. Not just these  monuments of religious importance also dot the city. Some of these are the Jama Masjid  Akshardham Temple and Lotus Temple.For shoppers  there are several markets in Delhi that offer everything from designer boutiques to affordable fashion. Chandani Chowk is often thronged by brides-to-be while Sarojini Nagar is for people looking for a good bargain. Delhi Haat is famous for it collection of clothes and handicrafts from local artisans from the country. If you want to sample some of Delhi’s lip-smacking food  head to Paranthewali Galli in Chandni Chowk or Hauz Khas Village for pubs  restaurants and clubs. Connaught Place or CP is another place to head to for amazing food and branded shops. It is best to take the metro to avoid being stuck in traffic in Delhi.Author: Kriti Saraswat-SatpathyThe average minimum and maximum temperature of Agra is as given below. The best time to visit Agra is also specified. What can be said about the mighty Taj Mahal in Agra that hasn't been said…Tomb of Itimad-ud-Daulah is a Mughal mausoleum in Agra. It is also referred to as…The tomb of Akbar the Great  located in Sikandra  in the suburbs of Agra is…Agra is primarily known for its Mughal architectural wonders. However  move beyond monumnets like the…Agra is famous for its marble stone inlay and a rare collection of handicraft items. Tourists…Agra features on the New York Times list of 52 places to visit in 2017 at no. 3!The Taj Mahal sure looks even more stunning from an aerial view and these photos are proof.Air pollution in north India has led to a deadly  widespread smog which has covered major landmarks including the Taj Mahal.They were two friends visiting the Taj Mahal who fell in love because of what this young lensman did!From the Taj Mahal to the streets of Varanasi  UP has a lot to offer and we can’t get enough of it!The good folks at the Government of Uttar Pradesh and Lonely Planet Magazine India invited us to explore the state. We bring you these dispatches from a journey to the land of the TajIt is no doubt that Taj Mahal is India’s topmost tourist attraction let alone Agra’s. But while you are planning a trip to witness the white marble wonder of the world  we will recommend a place…Watch video: If you haven't visited Taj Mahal  this video will leave you awestruck!The Taj Mahal is one of the many monuments in India that is flocked by tourists from all around the world throughout the year. However  there are quite a few things you can do around…Taj Mahal is undoubtedly India’s most famous tourist attraction. Often referred to as the epitome of love  the Taj Mahal in Agra was built by Emperor Shahjahan as a memorial to his beloved wife Mumtaz…37 km49 km54 km55 kmGet a Guide for your Next HolidayCopyright © 2017. India WebPortal Private Limited. All Rights Reserve
	Wish to realize a dream vacation? Welcome to the amazing tourism city of the TajMahal - Agra  India. The seat of the great Mughal rulers for ages Agra  India offers its treasure trove for all the tourists from India and abroad. Even though Agra  India is synonymous with the Taj  the city stands in testimony to the great amount of architectural activity of the Mughals. TajMahal is the epitome of love  poem in white marble  one of the Seven Wonders of the World besides being the pride of India. In fact all the monuments of Agra  India have contributed to Agra Tourism. Terrific Agra Packages from us will ensure you plan your Agra Travel soon. Delhi to Agra to Jaipur make the famous Golden Triangle tour of India. 
	History of Agra is amply evident from the numerous historical monuments in and around the city. Though the history of Agra city is linked with the Mughal dynasty  numerous other rulers also contributed to the rich history of Agra. Agra was founded by Sikandar Lodhi (Lodhi dynasty; Delhi Sultanate) in the 16th century. Babur (founder of the Mughal dynasty) also stayed for sometime in Agra and introduced the concept of square Persian-styled gardens here. Emperor Akbar built the Agra fort; Jahangir beautified it with palaces and gardens. Shahjahan marked the zenith of Mughal architecture  when he built the Taj. The post-Mughal era's history of Agra saw the rule of the Jats  Marathas and finally the British taking over the city.

	History of Agra is amply evident from the numerous historical monuments in and around the city. Though the history of Agra city is linked with the Mughal dynasty  numerous other rulers also contributed to the rich history of Agra. Agra was founded by Sikandar Lodhi (Lodhi dynasty; Delhi Sultanate) in the 16th century. Babur (founder of the Mughal dynasty) also stayed for sometime in Agra and introduced the concept of square Persian-styled gardens here. Emperor Akbar built the Agra fort; Jahangir beautified it with palaces and gardens. Shahjahan marked the zenith of Mughal architecture  when he built the Taj. The post-Mughal era's history of Agra saw the rule of the Jats  Marathas and finally the British taking over the city.
	The timeless city of Mughal Splendor and one of the most important seats of empires and kingdoms  Agra has a plain  dusty geography combined with extreme weathers having sharp contrasts. The season-wise break up of Agra can be stated as follows
The Summer Season: The summer season in Agra stretches from April to July and is associated with searing heat  accompanied by hot  blowing winds. This is the least favorable time to visit Agra as the exhausting heat may take away all the pleasure of travel. However  due to thin crowd  the rates of the hotels as well as restaurants are at their lowest and there are good  bargain-able deals available at most of the places. If you must visit Agra during this time  wear light cotton clothes and don’t forget to wear sunglasses and sunscreen. Moreover  always carry a water bottle with you.
The Monsoon Season: August to October is the monsoon season in Agra. Although the rainy season brings with it a new freshness and the temperature lowers down significantly  clogged and slushy roads can dampen some spirit. But it is also one of the best times to see the magnificent Taj Mahal in all its washed glory. Enjoy the famous bazaar shopping  revel the amazing rickshaw ride and savor the sweet  hot chai from one of the many stalls. To best enjoy the monsoon season  always carry an umbrella or a raincoat and keep your spirits high.
The Winter Season: The Winter season in Agra begins in October and extends roughly till March. This is said to be the best time to visit this historical city. Pleasant weather and cool breezes make sightseeing a memorable experience. Explore the wonderful heritage and admire timeless monuments at your leisure. However  this is also the peak tourist season and the prices for hotels and restaurants skyrocket. The month of January witness Chilly weather and one must carry ample warm clothes to stay protected. Nevertheless  the charm of enjoying a hot cup of tea in some shack with the backdrop of exquisite history and heritage is amazing and without any parallel.  BY AIR -
                    Agra’s Kheria Airport is located at a distance of 12.5 kilometers from the city center. The airport is a seasonal commercial airport which serve only Air India flights from New Delhi. It normally takes an hour to reach Agra from New Delhi by air. Taxis are easily available and will take you to your hotel or any other tourist destination you want to reach.                  BY RAIL -
                    The beautiful  historical city of Agra is easily accessible by road and has four main railway stations-the Agra Cantonment  Agra Fort  Idgah Agra junction and Raja ki Mandi. The stations are well connected to major cities and tourist locations in India. Moreover  some superfast trains are also available that connect Agra to Kolkata  Delhi and Mumbai. Taxis  cabs and rickshaws are easily available to carry travelers to their destinations.                  BY ROAD -
                    Agra can be conveniently accessed by bus from all the major cities and locations of India like Delhi  Lucknow  Kanpur and Gwalior etc. Agra city has two major bus terminals-The Idgah Bus Stand and the Interstate Bus Terminus (ISBT).  You can also opt for self-drive or rent a cab.               
	The most famous of the monuments of Agra  India is the TajMahal. TajMahal is a symbol of the devotion and dedication of love. TajMahal of Agra is a monument built by emperor Shah Jahan In the memory of her wife Mumtaz Mahal. TajMahal expresses the magnificence of Mughal architecture. The Taj has done wonders to Agra Tourism. Taj is a must in each one of the Agra packages offered by us. Agra to Jaipur is an interesting package option.
	Besides the TajMahal amongst the other famous monuments of Agra  India is the Agra Fort. Agra fort was built by Emperor Akbar. He was undoubtedly the Greatest Mughal emperor of India. The construction of Agra fort commenced in the 1565 and completed in 1571. Built with red sandstone Agra Fort is a mixture of the Islamic and Hindu styles of architecture. Agra Tourism would be incomplete without this monument. Most of the Agra packages offered by us take you to the Agra Fort. Agra to Jaipur is the usual choice in pacakges.
	It is a tomb built with white marble in the typical Islamic style architecture. It was built by the Mughal Empress Noor Jahan in the memory of her father Itmad-ud-Daulah. It happens to be one of the must visit monuments of Agra. This monument of Agra is usually included in all the Agra packages. Travel from Agra to Jaipur is usually taken up by many tourists. 
	The tomb of the great Mughal emperor Akbar is worth visiting. Akbar's tomb is a mixture of many architectural styles and completely different from earlier Mughal Buildings. Visit to this monuments of Agra is esential to make your Agra tour complete. Visit to this monument is generally a part of the Agra packages
	Famously known as the city of Ghosts  it was built by the Great Mughal Emperor. Fatehpur Sikri is a place worth visiting to discover how once the city could have been which has now turned into ruins. many a Agra packages include a trip to Fatehpur Sikri also.
	The seat of the Mughal power in India  Agra has ethereal charms as a heritage city where history  traditions  colors and a unique energy can be experienced seeping out though its corners.
	One of the most visited tourist destinations in India  Agra is also known for its flourishing bazars (markets) where the true cosmopolitan character of the city comes out in all its dimensions. With Taj Mahal  Fatehpur Sikri and Agra Fort already in the list of to do things in Agra  the charms of Agra bazar is something unique  which cannot be missed.
	There are variety of options for which one can shop for in Agra. Besides the miniature Taj as souvenirs  which are the obvious favorites  tourists can purchase stone handicrafts  apparels  shoes  spices  marble work  snacks  ethnic clothes  leather products etc. Some of the best places for doing shopping in Agra are listed below:
Unique Arts and Crafts
	This is a wholesale shop selling items such as different Taj Souvenirs  products with elaborate carvings  products with mosaic and mirror work etc. The shop has items with diverse price range and one can shop away articles from small curios to as large as garden furniture.
Subhash Emporium
	An old and venerable shop  the Subhash Emporium is one of the best places in Agra to buy stone handicrafts and other carved products. The quality of the products and the workmanship speaks for itself and this also partially explains the high price of the items. But this is a great place to take away an endurable and beautiful stone product back home.
Kinari Bazaar
	Located behind the Jama Masjid  the Kinari Bazar is a busy thoroughfare of lanes and streets  exuding a charm of bright colors and hustling sounds. Walking through the Kinari Bazar is a unique experience in itself. One can shop for a variety of products. From marble works to jewelry  spices  fabrics and clothing  there are tremendously diverse options. The market is crowded for most of the time  but nevertheless is a great place to be.
Sadar Bazaar
	This is probably the best place to do shopping in Agra. Located close to both Taj Mahal and Agra Fort  the market is famous for leather products  petha (sweets)  garments and handicrafts. Sadar Bazar is also close to the Agra Cantt. Railway Station and opens at 11 AM in the morning and closes at 11 PM.Copyright © 2017 Indian Holiday Pvt.Ltd. All right reserved. Recognized by Ministry of Tourism  Government of IndiaAgra - Located 220 kms from Delhi  Agra is a must visit city on any Tour of India. Home of the World famous Taj Mahal  Agra provides avid glimpses of Mughal architecture. To be in Agra is like taking a walk through India's Mughal period history. Other than the Taj Mahal  Agra's attractions include the Red Fort  built by Emperor Akbar on the banks of the River Yamuna  Sikandra  the mausoleum of Emperor Akbar  the Itmad-ud-Daulah  a mausoleum built for Empress Noor Jahan's father and last but not the least and a short distance away  Fatehpur Sikri  with its very impressive architecture and interesting stories of it having been built and then abandoned. After Delhi  Agra is the most visited tourist city in North India.      A modern hotel  located less than 2 kms from the Taj Mahal  in the heart of the tourist belt of Agra  the Howard Park Plaza offers modern air-conditioned rooms with ensuite facilites.  All rooms are equipped with color televisions and mini bars.  Leisure facilities here include an outdoor swimming pool.Agra's only heritage hotel  the Grand Imperial  is located in the heart of the city of Agra  less than 5 kms from the Taj Mahal.  Rooms and Suites are furnished in old colonial style  and have old photographs and momentos from the yesteryears.  Leisure facilities here include a small spa  and an outdoor swimming pool.Part of the Taj Group of Hotels   the Taj Gateway is a modern Hotel less than 2 kms from the Taj Mahal . Some of its rooms have excellent views of the Taj Mahal. The Hotel offers a swimming pool and a fitness center.  In addition  the Taj Gateway  has two restaurants and bars.The Trident Agra  is set amidst beautiful gardens and is only a few minutes walk away from the famous Taj Mahal. The hotel is built of the red stone reminiscent of the Mughal era  designed around landscaped central courtyard with swimming pool and fountains. All rooms are centrally air-conditioned and equipped with modern facilities like a mini-bar  complimentary tea and coffee making facility  direct dial telephone  data port connectivity  television set with satellite transmission and a personal safe. The hotel features an informal  poolside brasserie and a Bar. The restaurant serves an extensive buffet  and a choice of Continental and Indian cuisine.Set in 35 acres of beautifully landscaped gardens  close to the Taj Mahal  the Mughal Sheraton is one of the best hotels in Agra. The hotel has recently been upgraded to Luxury collection standards of the Sheraton group  and all rooms are newly renovated with state-of-the-art amenities and facilities.  Leisure faciliites include a state of the art gym  and India's largest Spa  as well as an outdoor pool etc. The hotel has several restaurants and bars  including Peshawari  which is considered  Agra's finest Indian restaurant. Agra's most exclusive and luxurious hotel  Amar Vilas  is only six hundred meters from the Taj Mahal. With domes  arches  reflection pools  terraced gardens  lakes and pavilions  Amar Vilas draws its inspiration from Mughal architecture. Most rooms and public areas have exceptional views of the Taj Mahal. All rooms and suites feature a separate walk-in closet with electronic safe  colour satellite TV  DVD/CD player. Minibar and a facility to make tea and coffee. Beautiful marble bathrooms feature both a bathtub and a separate shower cubicle with deluxe toiletries. Some rooms have private sit-out balconies  overlooking the Taj Mahal.  Certainly  the best place to stay in Agra.General InformationLocated on the banks of Yamuna River  in the North of Uttar Pradesh  Agra is a wonderful place and a popular tourist stopover. General information on Agra reveals that the city was established by Badal Singh in the year 1475. Depicted as “Agrraba”  in the Mahabharata  the city of Agra was once the capital of the Lodhis and the Mughals. In the sixteenth and the seventeenth century  Agra developed as a centre of art  culture  learning and commerce  especially with the help of the Mughal rulers like Akbar  Shah Jahan and Jehangir. Agra houses several historic prestigious places  monuments and buildings which upholds the tradition and culture of the city. Besides being home to UNESCO Heritage Sites like the famous Taj Mahal  Agra Fort and the Fatehpur Sikri  Agar is also replete with other attractions like Itmad-Ud-Daulah's Tomb  Mariam's Tomb  Akbar's Tomb in Sikandra  Jama Masjid  Chini Ka Rauza etc. The city of Agra with its laid-back style of living  treasured architecture  jewelry and handicrafts  is one of the remarkable cities in the world. Besides many celebration of different festivals  irrespective of caste distinction  takes place with all the zeal and excitement. The top administrator of the city is the Commissioner  who is responsible for planned development and proper administration of the city. The district magistrate is responsible for maintaining the law and order in the Region. Besides  the block development officers and the chief development officers also play an important role. Agra Municipal Corporation provides the people with all the required civic amenities. Problems pertaining to infrastructure are addressed by the Nagar Nigam of Agra. The city of Agra can be conveniently accessed from all corners of the India. It has its own airport known as the Kheria Airport from where all the domestic airlines ply. A major rail station in Agra connects the city to important parts in India. Further  Agra is also connected through National Highways 2  3 and 11. Private and state transport buses and other local means of transport are also available within the city. As the city experiences semi arid  tropical climate with very hot summers  therefore the best time to visit the city is in the months of October to March when the climate in Agra is pleasant and ideal for touring. Disclaimer: All efforts have been made to make this image accurate. However Compare Infobase Limited and its directors do not own any responsibility for the correctness or authenticity of the same.
jujujuujujujujujujujujuju muy interesanteVIVA WILLYREEEXVery good and interesting factsVery good and interesting facts








      BLOG_CMT_createIframe('https://www.blogger.com/rpc_relay.html');
    


Loading
Choose your preferred language. We speak English (US) and 42 other languages.
Most often used by people in the United StatesAll languages
Looking for the perfect break? Reviewers gave Agra a very good rating.

Taj Ganj   Agra


Review score
Score from 142 reviews
 We spent one night at the hotel as we were visiting Agra. We got upgraded to a suite and the room was beautiful. We obviously spent most of our time visiting the Taj Mahal  Agra Fort  but our stay was very pleasant. 
Taj Ganj   Agra


Review score
Score from 16 reviews

Taj Ganj   Agra


Good
Score from 240 reviews
 Really helpful friendly staff with excellent information and advice about Agra/the Taj Mahal 
Agra


Good
Score from 599 reviews
 We are a family from New Zealand travelling with 3 children. The Hotel Atulyaa Taj was the perfect place for us to stay while in Agra. It is very convenient to The Taj Mahal and Taj Mahal ticket office.... 
Taj Ganj   Agra


Good
Score from 86 reviews
 Staff nice and helpful. No issues at all 
Agra


Good
Score from 49 reviews
 Big comfy bed  very helpful staff speaking perfect English. View of Taj Mahal from the roof. Will be back in Agra in February and will stay here again for sure. ! The kitchen went out of their way in making... 

All 263 properties in Agra


Save time  save money!

Sign up and we'll send the best deals to you

Discover the Best Hotels  B&Bs;  Inns and Vacation Rentals in Agra – Based on 20 246 Real Reviews from Actual Guests

#1 of 181 hotels in Agra

#2 of 181 hotels in Agra

#3 of 181 hotels in Agra
We've negotiated with thousands of hotels to get the very best deals. We call them Secret Deals and they only last for a limited time.You can get these deals for free by subscribing to our newsletters. You can even choose your favorite destinations to receive personalized deals.Don't worry – your email address is safe with us. We'll never share your private information and you can unsubscribe at any time.Please enter a valid email addressSorry  it seems as though you’ve subscribed several times already. This may be a glitch  so please try again later.Sorry  we’ve encountered an error. Please try again later.
Your sign-up was successful
Soon you'll receive news about top-rated hotels  irresistible deals and exciting destinations!
You're done! You can close this window.
Thanks 
Your sign-up was successful! We'll send you the latest on our half-price deals.
You can always manage your subscriptions by signing in to your account. You're done! You can close this window.Exceptional reviews
Most of the tour agencies in Delhi and Jaipur offer you a day tour... I wouldn't recommend that... It's definitely worth staying there for a night... You can get up early in the morning at 5 and head to Taj Mahal for sunrise... it's more peaceful and calm around 5:30am... less tourist.. if you go there as day tour  then you will end up at Taj Mahal during a mid day and there will be 1000's of tourist...
Review score reviews
The most dirty  filthy city ever. Unsafe  smelly  people living in bad condition. If there were no Taj Mahal in this city  no one will ever come here. Nothing else to see except Taj Mahal  and maybe Agra Fort  that's all. Don't waste your time in this filthy city.
Review score reviews
เป็นเมืองที่ถ้าไม่มีทัชมาฮาลก็ไม่มีอะไรที่ต้องมา เพราะผู้คนน่ากลัวมาก. ตื้อนักท่องเที่ยวตลอดเวลา. แท็กซี่จะหลอกล่อเราสารพัด. พวกเขาไม่รู้ว่าการทำแบบนี้เป็นการทำลายแหล่งทำมาหากินของเขาไปเรื่อยๆ
Exceptional reviews
Visiting Agra - must visit is Taj Mahal  Fatehour Sikri (located 40 km outside the city but it would be a pity if you don't visit the place  coming this far)  Agra Fort.Optional places: Itma Ud Daulah  Sikandar  Mehtab Bagh (for the sunset view of the Taj).
Very Good reviews
A good place to explore the history of Hindusthan. If you are a history wizard  you would like to see how Tejo Mahalay temple was converted into Taj Mahal tomb and Badal Singh Chauhan fort became Agra fort. Read some books on the real history of these structures before you hear the fairytales from the guides. I liked the great structures in Agra and learned the real history.
Very Good reviews
We spent only one night at the ITC Murghal Hotel  so just around 2 days. Agra's traffic is like other cities and towns in India - manic. However you get to see one of the seven wonders of the world; Agra Fort; Akbar's Tomb and a host of other historical sites. We visited mid April and the temperature reached 45 deg centigrade so beware. The plus side is that its considered out of season so some of the site to visit have less people. So out of season during the cooler months the queuing at sites could be very lengthy. We had a guide and I would recommend doing the same to skip the lengthy queues.

“On of the best hotels in Agra! Will come back”

“My time in Agra at Kamal Hotel was just great!”

“This place is really nice place to stay in Agra.Clean and comfortable bed.Vandna is a  very nice person and friedly.The homemade Indian food was so fantastic.I recommend to try when you are stay in this lovely homestay.”

“Quiet little budget hotel  not too fancy  but for a short stay it was a perfect place for us with clean and tidy rooms. Breakfast was good and the staff were very friendly. It was located in an excellent position  very near the Taj Mahal  very convenient  but little noisy until midnight.”

“It’s a three stars budget hotel but the rooms are quite big and very clean. The furniture looks new  the beds are very comfortable and the bathroom is big as well. There is free internet around all the hotel.”

Poor
3.8

We'll send you a link to download the app directly from your mobile or tabletBooking.com is part of The Priceline Group  the world leader in online travel & related services.
We have more than 70 million property reviews  and they're all from real  verified guests.


How does it work?




1



It starts with a booking
The only way to leave a review is to first make a booking. That's how we know our reviews come from real guests who have stayed at the property.







2



Followed by a trip
When guests stay at the property  they check out how quiet the room is  how friendly the staff is  and more.







3



And finally  a review
After their trip  guests tell us about their stay. We check for naughty words and verify the authenticity of all guest reviews before adding them to our site.




If you booked through us and want to leave a review  please sign in first.

Sign in and leave a review

1The only way to leave a review is to first make a booking. That's how we know our reviews come from real guests who have stayed at the property.2When guests stay at the property  they check out how quiet the room is  how friendly the staff is  and more.3After their trip  guests tell us about their stay. We check for naughty words and verify the authenticity of all guest reviews before adding them to our site.If you booked through us and want to leave a review  please sign in first.Check-in DateCheck-out Date
Get exclusive access to members-only deals by email.

For a limited time only
Please enter a valid email addressSorry  it seems as though you’ve subscribed several times already. This may be a glitch  so please try again later.Sorry  we’ve encountered an error. Please try again later.By logging into an account  you're agreeing with our Terms & Conditions and Privacy StatementForgot your password?
Enter your email address and we'll send you a link to reset your password
Email Sent
Please check your email and click the link to reset your password 
Forgot your password?
Enter your email address and we'll send you a link to reset your password
Email Sent
Please check your email and click the link to reset your password 
By creating an account  you're agreeing with our Terms and Conditions and Privacy Statement.Manage An Existing BookingNo registration required Jump to navigation    x Save Rs.  by redeemingPAYBACK points while doing paymentSelect a different country:  United Arab Emirates  United States      (575 Hotels in Agra upto 80% Off - Book Now Hotel Prices Starting at Rs. 199) 5 Star Hotel - Tajganj  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.6/5   (422 reviews)   Hotel in very good prime location in Agra very close to taj Mahala and red fort sadar market is also very close to hotel. Parking space is very congested overall hotel is good gym and swimming pool is too little but OK for exercise   Aliya Ms | Mon  May 15  2017Couple Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Fatehabad  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.3/5   (363 reviews)   At this sort of price it is an amazing deal staff is very co-operative .. Room service is very good .. Rooms are very clean as well since breakfast is buffet so you also have so many choices in brealfast as well overall amazing experience :-)   Shubham Pathak | Sun  May 14  2017Solo Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.7/5   (198 reviews)   Hotel situated in good location  service of hotel is good  behaviour of staff is also appreciatable. My stay is peaceful during period. I hope it is better choice in this rate. Rooms are neat and clean including bathroom. Near about Taj Mahala. See Taj Mahala on the roof of hotel.   Tarun | Tue  May 2  2017Solo Traveller 2 Star Hotel - Vibhav Nagar  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.6/5   (108 reviews)   Room service was good and quick. Location was convenient nearby Agra fort and Taj Mahala. Filling amazed and happy after a great stay and visit. MMT great Value for Money. But the only issue was water draining was a biggest problem at washroom.   Vishu | Fri  May 12  2017Couple TravellerSituated in the city  famous for one of the seven wonders of world  Agra. Amar Yatri Niwas is a perfect amalgam of convenience  comfort and value  which will surely make stay a pleasurable experience for guests. This enchanting place presents the gue ... 2 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating   4/5 (195 reviews)  Excellent room neat a the clean 
Ambience is good 
Location is suitable for tourist as it Is only 1 ...moreHotel Viren Sofitel is located in Agra. It is at a distance of 8 km from Agra Airport  5 km from Idgah Railway Station and 5 km from Idgah Bus Stand.The property has well equipped and spacious rooms with amenities like air conditioner  television  in ... 1 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating   2.4/5 (8 reviews)  Non AC room quality is average. No WiFi  TVs are very old. And with few challens. Very bad quality c...moreJust 2.2 km from the Taj Mahal and 2.9 km from Sadar Bazar  Hotel Dasaprakash - Agra is a suitable accommodation option for both leisure and business travellers. Agra Cantonment Railway Station is 5 km away.Apart from a conference hall  the hotel off ... 3 Star Hotel - Vibhav Nagar  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating   4/5 (295 reviews)  Room was OK and the service was good. Staff was very friendly and polite and provided support every ...more 3 Star Hotel - Sikandra  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.2/5   (209 reviews)   Hotel location is good and food is really tasty. Overall property is good and value for money. Only drwaback is that it is far from historical places like Jamaal. Lalquila etc.
Staff is familiar and soft spoken   Mohit | Mon  May 8  2017Family Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.5/5   (452 reviews)   Nice hotel  great ambience.
Thanks. They have to work on the swimming pool and should provide some additional facilities. Can add few more things to their breakfast menu  specially Indian cuisine. Overall good hotel.   Sunny | Sun  May 7  2017Couple Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Vibhav Nagar  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4/5   (295 reviews)   This Hotel is good and very neat and clean. I was good experience in this hotel and this was located at good place. And it is best for value of money. In future I will stay again if I will got opportunity.   Pulkit | Wed  Apr 26  2017Solo Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Agra  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.1/5   (55 reviews)   The hotel staff was. Courteous but had to wait to check-in as they were. Busy. Attending their personal work instead of attending The food quality was good. The room was spacious and nice Staff was Prompt in attending to your needs The service was good The hotel is just near to Taj or around 3 km   Rakesh Bhargava | Wed  May 17  2017Solo TravellerRoom was good... Toilet is not up to the mark.. Room services are good. Reception staff is helpful... Hotel is very good for stay purpose no doubt in that.
Go for Maniram palace ...Sartaj Aziz - 2017-03-06 3 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  Agra  Last booked at 3(hrs) agoMakeMyTrip Rating   3.4/5 (81 reviews) Excellent stay experience. The hotel is doing great in respect to hospitality  amicable and courteous staff from top to bottom! Breakfast spread is vast and rooms are clean and mai ...Saurabh Vij - 2017-05-14 5 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  Agra  Last booked at 6(hrs) agoMakeMyTrip Rating   4.6/5 (302 reviews) Good location. We found lot of good vegetarian hotel near by. Staff is good and co-operative. Taj is very close by they arranged for taxi. Good stay.Sachin Biyani - 2017-05-13 3 Star Hotel - Taj Mahal  Agra  Last booked at 6(hrs) agoMakeMyTrip Rating   3.6/5 (468 reviews)  5 Star Hotel - Bagichi  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.5/5   (165 reviews)   Value for money ... Hospitality is too good ... Good experience ... Location is near to Taj Mahala. Hotel staff is always ready to help you ... If you want some dish outside the buffet menu they prepared that also ... They gave us early check kin and late checkout. Will definitely recommend and will visit again.   Bharti | Sun  May 7  2017Family Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Taj Mahal  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.9/5   (244 reviews)   Our experience were so good for this hotel. The location of this room was perfect. Room service was good. The staff of the hotel was average but hotel bathroom was so small. Overall experience was so good.   Shivam Mudhotiya | Tue  May 16  2017Group Traveller 1 Star Hotel - Kamla Nagar  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.1/5   (9 reviews)   When I reached hotel they ask I Ll check from MMT then after 30 min they provides rooms.
Room conditions is not good as the charge by MMT .. But location is excilent if you reached from Delhi .. Via exp ... Txn   Danish Malik | Wed  Feb 22  2017Couple Traveller 3 Star Hotel - MG Road Area  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.1/5   (94 reviews)   The room is good  clean and well maintained  the location of hotel is very good and facilities are also good. But the TV is not clearly working otherwise it is good hotel in low budget. The working staff is also good.   Imtiyaz | Tue  May 16  2017Family Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Bagichi  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.1/5   (220 reviews)   The only negative thing happened here  they have not given a late checkout more than two hours. We have checked in by 9pm in the evening. Usually hotel people may allow at least three hours time those who checked in late. Hotel cleanliness and service is excellent. Location is also good. Parking facility have to improve. They usually allow people to park their car behind our parking. Its difficult. But my overall opinion is excellent. I can give 90 out of 100 ...   Haseeb Ahamed | Sat  May 13  2017Family Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Telipara  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.6/5   (941 reviews)   It's a first class stay... Value for money  room is 10 out of 10  cleanliness is  10 out of 10  food is awesome with nice breakfast. Overall  good value for money. If I would like to come I will visit this same hotel.   K. Prasad Naik | Tue  May 16  2017Family Traveller Tourist Complex Area  Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.9/5   (264 reviews)   Hotel is very good location is also very good just walking distance from taj Mahala. Food is also good but little bit costly. Rooms are big and clean. Staff is also very cooperative and nice over it is the value for money.   Ravi Anand | Fri  May 12  2017Solo Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Central Agra  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.7/5   (164 reviews)   The hotel's location is excellent .. Very close to taj Mahala .. The staff here is awesome .. This was my third stay with them and the service was great as ever .. Very clean rooms with good amenities. The staff is rwady to help you with any if your request even at 3 in night. I loved ny 2 day stay.   Paras Bhatia | Sun  May 14  2017Couple Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Taj Nagari  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4/5   (12 reviews)   I  along with my family  stayed for one night at Hotel Taj Villa. It was a nice and pleasant experience. Clean hotel with well furnished rooms. Restaurant is very good with delicious and home like food.   Moolchand Meena | Sun  Mar 26  2017Family Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Taj Ganj  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.2/5   (327 reviews)   Located just 600m from East gate of Taj Mahal  this hotel is a very good and value for money. My son enjoyed in Bathtub a lot. I was told that it has a rooftop restaurant with a swimming pool but could not visit due to my busy schedule.   Syed Kamal Haider | Sun  May 14  2017Family Traveller 4 Star Hotel - Sector 16 B  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.2/5   (107 reviews)   Great place enjoyed along with family however can improve over food quality rest no issues.
Staff was very kind and no issue observed in check in and out.
Locations were also well explained which actually helped us to plan accordingly.   Jay | Sun  May 7  2017Family Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Fatehabad Road  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.6/5   (302 reviews)   Excellent stay experience. The hotel is doing great in respect to hospitality  amicable and courteous staff from top to bottom! Breakfast spread is vast and rooms are clean and maintained. Shall come again. Thanks Ramada!   Saurabh Vij | Sun  May 14  2017Couple Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Taj Ganj  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4/5   (119 reviews)   Best on this rate  loved the food and services  location is also good  Room was also neat and clean and up to expectations  thanks to hotel for great hospitality and thanks to MMT for the deal  enjoyed the stay.   Subhas S Shimpiger | Mon  Apr 24  2017Family Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Taj Ganj  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  3.6/5   (359 reviews)   Nice hotel  friendly reception staff  few things hurts me :-
I am a bike rider  I reached there travelling more than 200km but at the main gate they did not allow me to enter with my bike  why I am there guest booked a room  came from Delhi but just because I came on bike(it's expensive one cruiser) gatekeeper told me to come from next gate which is staff gate for bike and scooters  but both gate are interconnected  do they treat differently car owners & bike riders  isn't it racism.   Inderpal | Tue  May 16  2017Couple Traveller 5 Star Hotel - Basai Khurd  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.6/5   (41 reviews)   Had a great stay at Trident Agra. The hospitality was immaculate  and the staff was always keen on attending to our every little need. The rooms could have been a bit larger and better furnished for the price but apart from that  nothing really to complain about during our stay!   Vijay Grover | Sat  Apr 15  2017Family Traveller 4 Star Hotel - Shilp Gram  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.4/5   (240 reviews)   Very nice location and very clean. Near by Taj Mahal..
Taj Mahal can be seen by terrace. All staff members are good and kind. The room is also clean. Proximity to Taj most important   Varsha Oza | Thu  May 11  2017Family Traveller 3 Star Hotel - Paktola  AgraMakeMyTrip Rating  4.1/5   (446 reviews)   Very near to taj. Hptel location is very peaceful. Coprative staff valu for money clean room. Near from shopping market well maintenance easy to find. Service is good. Good food quality. Very nice location. On vip road.   Praveen Tiwari | Sun  May 7  2017Family TravellerPlease wait while we fetch hotels for you.Product OfferingMakeMyTripTop Domestic HotelsTrending Domestic HotelsTop Hotels By CategoryFollow Us© 2017 MakeMyTrip.com. All Rights Reserved. +91 9313 9313 9325% Off - Coupon BOOK25 Applied
                              When Agra becomes the topic of conversation  the Taj Mahal comes to mind immediately. The marble palace draws tourists by the thousands every day. It is one monument that is worth the hype. However  the Taj Mahal is not the only place of interest in Agra. The Mughals have left a lasting legacy in the city  including fascinating mausoleums and tombs. For those interested in getting into the thick of the action can visit the bustling marketplaces in the area. Upon arrival  one is immediately greeted by rickshaw-wallahs  unofficial guides and souvenir vendors. While some are genuinely helpful  others are persistently annoying. Most tourists choose to take a whistle-stop tour of Agra  after a lengthy stay in Delhi. However  there is quite a lot to see in the vicinity. If one looks carefully  there is a lot that can be appreciated. A day of sightseeing could take you to Fatehpur Sikri and the pilgrimage centre of Mathura. Agra is perched on a land bend in the Yamuna River. The fort and the Taj Mahal are 2km apart and both overlook the river on different sides. The city is well-connected  with the bus terminus and train station located a few kilometres in the southwest. It is interesting to note that the artisans and labourers who worked hard to erect the Taj have built their homes south of the mausoleum. This has led to the creation of a network of alleys referred to as Taj Ganj – a popular living hotspot for budget travellers. Some of the best historical sites are located in this quaint city. Apart from the monumental Taj Mahal  there are other places of historical significance one can visit. A visit to one of the finest Mughal forts  Agra Fort  should form part of any travel itinerary to the city. The monumental red sandstone fort is embedded in history. A visit to the Taj Mahal is not complete without taking a tour of the Taj Museum  which is located in the same complex. The museum is home to a wide selection of Mughal miniature paintings as well as a few silver and gold coins. Why not take a tour of Akbar’s marble and sandstone tomb? On entering the large courtyard through the beautiful gateway  one can behold the three-storey minarets and other intricate patterns. It is located 10km west of the Agra Fort. A trip to Agra should be planned between November and March. The weather is perfect for sightseeing during this time. Try and avoid visiting the city during the hot summer months between April and October. There are a number of premium and budget hotels in Agra. For those looking to stay close to the station  there are a number of OYO rooms near Agra city railway station. For tourists looking to find accommodation close to the main hubs can book an OYO room in MG Road or near TDI Mall. There are a few hotels near historical places of interest  like Akbar’s Tomb and Itmad-Ud-Daulah Tomb.
                            India's Largest Branded Network of Hotels







English


 Hindi



 Action



 Adventure



 Biography



 Comedy



 Drama



 Fantasy



 Romance



 Sports 



 2D



 3D


					                        	Hey! No shows here..
													Please try other filters
											24/7 CUSTOMER CARERESEND BOOKING CONFIRMATIONSUBSCRIBE TO THE NEWSLETTERCopyright 2017 © Bigtree Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. All Rights Reserved.
					The content and images used on this site are copyright protected and copyrights vests with the respective owners. The usage of the content and images on this website is intended to promote the works and no endorsement of the artist shall be implied.  Unauthorized use is prohibited and punishable by law.Instant sign in with


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								
Want to rate and review movies you've watched?  All you need to do is sign up!Still not connected?Sign Up


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								

Already Connected?Sign InWe can help! All you need to do is enter your email ID and follow the instructions!


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								
Instant sign in with


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								
Want to rate and review movies you've watched?  All you need to do is sign up!Still not connected?Sign UpNo worries  just enter the info you gave while booking & we'll resend it in a jiffy!


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								
errorSubscribe to our free newsletters for latest updates on movies  events  plays  sports & new products!


error :  oops please enter a valid email address.
								
errorThank You!Your Response has been received successfully.We will get back to you shortly.Sorry!There seems to be some problem sending the request.Please try again later.Notice and Take Down policyThank you for your valuable input!Do you want to report anything else?
							 Report
Something went wrong Please try again.
							Report
Whoa! Something is not right. Please refresh the page and try again
Refresh 

[email protected]/* <![CDATA[ */!function(t e r n c a p){try{t=document.currentScript||function(){for(t=document.getElementsByTagName('script') e=t.length;e--;)if(t[e].getAttribute('data-cfhash'))return t[e]}();if(t&&(c=t.previousSibling)){p=t.parentNode;if(a=c.getAttribute('data-cfemail')){for(e='' r='0x'+a.substr(0 2)|0 n=2;a.length-n;n+=2)e+='%'+('0'+('0x'+a.substr(n 2)^r).toString(16)).slice(-2);p.replaceChild(document.createTextNode(decodeURIComponent(e)) c)}p.removeChild(t)}}catch(u){}}()/* ]]> */022 6144 5050  022 3989 5050Whoa! Something is not right. Please refresh the page and try again
Refresh 

[email protected]/* <![CDATA[ */!function(t e r n c a p){try{t=document.currentScript||function(){for(t=document.getElementsByTagName('script') e=t.length;e--;)if(t[e].getAttribute('data-cfhash'))return t[e]}();if(t&&(c=t.previousSibling)){p=t.parentNode;if(a=c.getAttribute('data-cfemail')){for(e='' r='0x'+a.substr(0 2)|0 n=2;a.length-n;n+=2)e+='%'+('0'+('0x'+a.substr(n 2)^r).toString(16)).slice(-2);p.replaceChild(document.createTextNode(decodeURIComponent(e)) c)}p.removeChild(t)}}catch(u){}}()/* ]]> */022 6144 5050  022 3989 5050Your tickets are waiting to be Booked!Are you sure you want to deactivate your account? Click ok to proceed or cancelOops you have exceeded order limit.Loading...Redirecting you...
 
Agra is a great architectural heritage in India  a charmed city can boast of the most splendid monuments in the world  including three world heritage monuments.
Agra is a part of Brijbhoomi the land associated with the birth and legendry activities of lord Krishna. In Agra City there are five Shiva temples  which are the symbols of ancient culture. Agra was the capital city of Sikander Lodhi  the second ruler of the Lodhi dynasty  who defeated by the persian King Babur in 1526 A.D. Babur too made Agra his capital city and so began the great Mughal rule. It was Babur who build the first monument in Agra  a planned garden called Gul-e-Afgaan or the 
Aaram Baugh.After Babar in (1530 AD) HUMAUN took over the thrown of Agra. Sher Shah Soori also continued Agra as his Capital.
During the rule of Akbar (1556 to 1605 A.D.) Agra earned fame all over the world and was counted one of the great and beautiful cities of Medinal India. Emperor Akbar constructed many beautiful buildings. In the premises of famous Fatehpur Sikri and Agra Fort. During his rule people of all caste and religion living friendly upon which Akbar declared the concept of  Sulah Kul  in making the personality of Akbar the great his  NAVARATANS  Raja Man Singh  Raja Toder Mal Hakeem Lukman  Raja Birbal  Mullah-Do-Pyaza  Abdul-Fazal-Feuzi  Abdul Rahim Khana Khan and Miyan Tan Sen Played an important role. For developing feeling of harmony and brotherhood among the people of various religions  Akbar started new religion named Deen-E-Elahi.
Sikandra and Etmad-Ud-Dowla are the famous buildings of Jahangiri period.
World famous Taj Mahal was constructed by Shahjahan in the sweet memory of his beloved queen Mumtaj Mahal. Agra earned the world fame due to Taj Mahal. Shah Jahan's period was remembered as a golden period for construction of good buildings and for their beautifications. During the British period Agra was made a District in 1805 A.D. and a Collector was posted Agra presidency was founded in 1833 A.D. During Agra presidency in 1835 A.D. Weatern - North border Province  which is known as United province was formed of which Agra remained Capital up to 1857 A.D. After 1857 A.D. mutiny the capital of United Province was shifted from Agra to Allahabad. After this Agra remained only Commissionary which is still continuing.
Massive monuments  majestic buildings and still flourishing arts and crafts including leatherwork and marble-inlay work along with delicious Mughal cuisine have now become the identity of the city. Besides Taj  many other magnificent monuments are a testimony to the zenith and golden period of the Mughal architecture.
Agra is a great architectural heritage in India  a charmed city can boast of the most splendid monuments in the world  including three world heritage monuments.
Agra is a part of Brijbhoomi the land associated with the birth and legendry activities of lord Krishna. In Agra City there are five Shiva temples  which are the symbols of ancient culture. Agra was the capital city of Sikander Lodhi  the second ruler of the Lodhi dynasty  who defeated by the persian King Babur in 1526 A.D. Babur too made Agra his capital city and so began the great Mughal rule. It was Babur who build the first monument in Agra  a planned garden called Gul-e-Afgaan or the 
Aaram Baugh.After Babar in (1530 AD) HUMAUN took over the thrown of Agra. Sher Shah Soori also continued Agra as his Capital.
During the rule of Akbar (1556 to 1605 A.D.) Agra earned fame all over the world and was counted one of the great and beautiful cities of Medinal India. Emperor Akbar constructed many beautiful buildings. In the premises of famous Fatehpur Sikri and Agra Fort. During his rule people of all caste and religion living friendly upon which Akbar declared the concept of  Sulah Kul  in making the personality of Akbar the great his  NAVARATANS  Raja Man Singh  Raja Toder Mal Hakeem Lukman  Raja Birbal  Mullah-Do-Pyaza  Abdul-Fazal-Feuzi  Abdul Rahim Khana Khan and Miyan Tan Sen Played an important role. For developing feeling of harmony and brotherhood among the people of various religions  Akbar started new religion named Deen-E-Elahi.
Sikandra and Etmad-Ud-Dowla are the famous buildings of Jahangiri period.
World famous Taj Mahal was constructed by Shahjahan in the sweet memory of his beloved queen Mumtaj Mahal. Agra earned the world fame due to Taj Mahal. Shah Jahan's period was remembered as a golden period for construction of good buildings and for their beautifications. During the British period Agra was made a District in 1805 A.D. and a Collector was posted Agra presidency was founded in 1833 A.D. During Agra presidency in 1835 A.D. Weatern - North border Province  which is known as United province was formed of which Agra remained Capital up to 1857 A.D. After 1857 A.D. mutiny the capital of United Province was shifted from Agra to Allahabad. After this Agra remained only Commissionary which is still continuing.
Massive monuments  majestic buildings and still flourishing arts and crafts including leatherwork and marble-inlay work along with delicious Mughal cuisine have now become the identity of the city. Besides Taj  many other magnificent monuments are a testimony to the zenith and golden period of the Mughal architecture.  Taj Mahal
Built by Shah Jahan as a memorial to his queen Mumtaz Mahal  the monument is made of white marble 
and is described as the most extravagant monument ever built for love. Apart from its fine symmetry and 
balance of design the Taj Mahal has some of the best example of inlay work. Taj Mahal is just 5km from 
the Grand Hotel.
Agra Fort
Built by the famous Mughal emperor Akbar in 1565 A.D. It houses the beautiful pearl mosque and many 
other noteworthy structures. Agra Fort is just 4.5km from the Grand Hotel.
Itmad-Ud-Daulah's Tomb
Built between 1622-28 A.D. by Nurjahan in memory of her father Ghilas-Ud-Din-Beg. This white marble 
tomb is an impressive structure predating the Taj itself. Itmad-Ud-Daulah's Tomb is just 7.5km from the 
Grand Hotel.

Fatehpur Sikri
Fatehpur Sikri as we see it today are the remains of the new capital that akbar built. Predominantly a red 
sand stone construction sprawling over huge area  the architectural style is very much in tune with the 
Emperor's dreams and partakes of both Hindu and Muslim style. Fatehpur Sikri is 42km from Grand Hotel.
Sikandra
The noteworthy monument here is the tomb of Akbar which shows an interesting fusion of Hindu and 
Muslim art and architecture reflecting the spirit of Emperor himself. Sikandra is 10km from Grand Hotel.
Radha Soami  Dayal Bagh 
The head quarter of Radha Soami Sect is a beautiful marble temple under construction since 1904. 
Radha Soami  Dayal Bagh is 10km from Grand Hotel.
Rambagh
Rambagh is one of the earliest garden laid by the Mughals and dates back to the era of Babar in the 
early 16th century. Rambagh is 11km from Grand Hotel.
Mehtab Bagh
Mehtab Bagh is located on the left bank of river Yamuna opposite to the Taj Mahal. The garden complex 
is a huge square measuring approx. 300m x 300m and is in straight alignment with the Taj Mahal.
Chini-Ka-Rauza
This is a memorial dedicated to the well-known poet and scholar of Jehangir's reign- Allama Afzel Khan 
Mullah Shukrullah of Shiraz. Chini-Ka-Rauza is 9km from Grand Hotel.
Jama Masjid
A Mosque dating back to 1648 A.D. built by Jahanara Begum  the absence of minarets and the shape of 
the dome give it a distinguished character. Jama Masjid is just 4.5km from Grand Hotel.
Mariyam's Tomb
Situated on the Delhi-Agra Highway  this red sandstone tomb is dedicated to the Rajput wife of Akbar 
and is said to have been built around 1611 A.D. Mariyam's Tomb is 11km from Grand Hotel.
Bharatpur
The highlight of this important bird sanctuary in India is the annual visit of the Siberina Cranes  which 
come here during the winter months. It is 60km from Grand Hotel.
Mathura
Mathura (or Brajbhoomi) is famous as the birthplace of Lord Krishna  an important deity in the Hindu 
religious pantheon. It is an important pilgrim place of the Hindus and one of the seven sacred cities in 
India. The main pilgrim center in Mathura is the Shri Krishna Janmabhoomi temple. Mathura is also an 
important craft center. Mathura is 141 km south of Delhi and 47 km northwest of Agra.
Vrindavan
Vrindavan  around 15 km from Mathura  is a major place of pilgrimage  on the banks of Yamuna. 
Attracting about 5 lakhs pilgrims every year  it is noted for its numerous temples- both old and modern. 
Vrindavan is synonymous with the innocent mirth and child like playfulness of Shri Krishna. Vrindavan  the 
little town known for the temples  big and small  famous and remote strewn all over the place.
Bateshwar
The place draws its present name 'Bateshwar' from the presiding deity of the region  Bateshwar 
Mahadeo. Temples  temples and temples. That's what greets you  spellbinds you and blesses you in 
Bateshwar. Just 70 kms  from Agra Bateshwar is a heavenly constellations of temples sprinkled on the 
ghats of river Yamuna.
Gwalior
The fort city of Gwalior is situated in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh. Held in succession by the 
Mughals  Jats  Marathas and the British  Gwalior was finally handed over to Jiyaji Rao Scindia at a formal 
durbar in 1885. Today  the city is also famous for the educational institutions attracting students from 
every nook and corner of the country.
Special Event:
Taj Mahotsav
Every year from 18th to 27th February the Taj Mahotsav (Festival) is held in Agra. It is a festival of art  craft  
culture and celebrations. The festival features live performances of music and dance too. Taj Mahotsav is 
held at Shilpgram  which is about 4.5km from Grand Hotel.






AIR Home






National Programs





Spl.Audience Programs






Important Coverages





Special Events






National Artists





Tenders





Commissioned Programs






Listener's Corner










 












Mobile Application










                         
                    







Sangeet Sammelan






 








Advertisements










                         
                    











AIR Home






National Programs





Spl.Audience Programs






Important Coverages





Special Events






National Artists





Tenders





Commissioned Programs






Listener's Corner










 












Mobile Application










                         
                    







Sangeet Sammelan






 








Advertisements










                         
                    









Weather





City
Max
Min








Delhi
40
27




Kolkata
37
27




Chennai
36
28








                         
                    


Things you view while shopping are saved here. 
        © 2017 Expedia  Inc. / Expedia Southeast Asia Pte Ltd / AAE Travel Pte Ltd. All rights reserved.
     